Consciousness is a strange beast.
Most of the time you are either awake or asleep, yet these are far from the only statues our minds can enter.
Over the next 10 pages we explore some of these journeys of the mind, from hypnosis to sleep paralysis.
Some of them may seem scary and exotic, but most of us experience at least one at some point in our lives.
All reveal the malleability of the human mind and the fragility of that sense of me, here, now.
Enjoy the trip.
You think you're awake, yet part of your brain is sleeping.
It could be happening to you right now, says Laura Spinney.
Earlier this year, a puzzling report appeared in the journal Sleep Medicine.
It described two Italian people who never truly slept.
They might lie down and close their eyes, but read-outs of brain activity showed none of the normal patterns associated with sleep.
Their behaviour was pretty odd, too.
Though largely unaware of their surroundings during these rest periods, they would walk around, yell, tremble violently and their hearts would race.
The remainder of the time they were conscious and aware but prone to powerful, dream-like hallucinations.
Both had been diagnosed with a neurodegenerative disorder called multiple system atrophy.
According to the report's authors, Roberto Vetrugno and colleagues from the University of Bologna, Italy, the disease had damaged the pair's brains to such an extent that they had entered status dissociatus, a kind of twilight zone in which the boundaries between sleep wakefulness completely break down.
That this can happen contradicts the way we usually think about sleep, but it came as no surprise to Mark Mahowald, medical director of the Minnesota Regional Sleep Disorders Center in Minneapolis, who has long contested the dogma that sleep and wakefulness are discrete and distinct states.
There is now overwhelming evidence that the primary states of being are not mutually exclusive, he says.
The blurring of sleep and wakefulness is very clear in status dissociatus, but he believes it can happen to us all.
If he is right, we will have to rethink our understanding of what sleep is and what it is for.
Maybe wakefulness is not the all-or-nothing phenomenon we thought it was either.
Received wisdom has it that at any given time, healthy people are in one of three states of vigilance: awake, in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep or in non-REM (NREM) sleep.
Each state is distinct and can be recognised by characteristic pattern of brain activity, as measured by an electroencephalogram (EEG).
Wakefulness is easy to detect.
Apart from the fact that a person's eyes are open and they are responsive, their EEG shows a pattern of high-frequency, low-amplitude waves.
NREM sleep is divided into four stages, each of which has its own distinctive EEG pattern.
REM is trickier to spot because in EEG terms it closely resembles stage 1 NREM sleep.
So to be sure it really is REM, researches also look for the telltale rapid eye movements and a slackening in the muscles of the chin and jaw.
Mahowald is not the only person to have questioned these neat distinctions.
David Dinges, a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, has probably deprived more people of sleep in the name of science than anyone else.
In one such study in the late 1980s, Dinges and his team revealed how easily the different states of vigilance can become intermingled.
When volunteers were subjected to tests of working memory in which they had to subtract numbers, they could do an average of 90 sums in 3 minutes with few errors.
After 52 hours deprived of sleep, their performance fell to around 70 subtractions, with not many more errors.
However, after they had slept for 2 hours the change was dramatic.
When we woke them up abruptly, and they rated themselves as alert and ready to go, they couln't do even one subtraction, says Dinges.
People even seemed to be dreaming as they attempted the task.
One subject mused: What if people ran faster than normal people run home, in the middle of a string of incorrect responses.
Known as sleep inertia, a less extreme version of such disorientation is now generally recognised as the cause of the grogginess some people get after their alarm clock goes off.
It is as if they are socially awake but functionally asleep, as if the brain circuits underlying responsiveness are up and and running, but those mediating working memory are still offline.
Mahowald is convinced that it is just one of many disorders that can be explained as a breakdown in the boundaries between sleep and wakefulness.
He lits a whole raft of such conditions in the same issue of Sleep Medicine as Vetrugnos description of people with status dissociatus (vol. 10, p. 159).
One is REM behavioural disorder (RBD), in which people in REM sleep act out their dreams because the temporary paralsis, or cataplexy, that normally accompanies this state is replaced by the full mobility of wakefulness.
In sleep paralysis the opposite is true.
Here, cataplexy intrudes into wakefulness, and a person wakes to find him or herself unable to move.
It is estimated that up to 40 percent of people have experienced this disturbing phenomenon.
Also suprisingly common are hypnagogic hallucinations – sensory illusions that occur on the cusp of sleep when the dreaming component of REM intrudes into wkefulness.
Mahowald's list also includes sleepwalking, night terrors and narcolepsy, which is an inherent instability in vigilance state boundaries characterised by rapid cycling between states and the tendency to fall asleep mid-sentence.
Controversially, the list also includes near-death experiences and alien abductions.
It is no coincidence, he says, that alien abductions almost always occur in the recumbent position, in the transition from wakefulness to sleep.
Sleep is a highly complex phenomenon in which changes in sensory, muscular, hormonal and neural systems must be coordinated to create a particular state of vigilance.
When you think about it, there are billions of pepole in the world who are shifting between wakefulness, REM and non-REM multiple times every 24 hours, says Mahowald.
It's amazing that the switching is as accurate as it is.
This accuracy suggests that there is a strong adaptive drive to be fully in one state or another.
But he also thinks that state dissociation – the presence of more than one vigilance state concurrently – is more common than anyone previously suspected.
The boundaries between sleep and wakefulness are particularly blurred when we are sleep-deprived.
Around a decate ago, Dinges realised that althought his sleep- deprived volunteers seemed to be awake, they were in fact experiencing momentary lapses, or microsleeps.
Since then, he has discovered that these fleeting naps last between half a second and 2 secons, and become increasingly frequent the longer we are deprived of sleep, until finally we cannot recover and nod off.
Dinges sees them as the outward sign of a tug-of-war between neural systems that are trying to initiate sleep, and others that are trying to maintain wakefulness.
This chimes with the ideas of James Krueger of Washington State University in Pullman, who has argued that the individual processing units in the brain – known as cortical columns – fall asleep independently when they become tired.
In his view, shifts between wakefulness and sleep occur when enough columns are in one state or the other (Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol 9, p 910).
Krueger believes this mosaic pattern of sleep explains sleep inertia and sleepwaling.
Some people are more prone to microsleeps than others.
In a 2007 study, Dinges and his colleagues showed that there are enormous differences in people's ability to resist the lure of sleep when tired.
Among a group of healthy, non. sleep- deprived adults, the differences in alertness are small.
But as soon as we provoke the system with some sleep deprivation, those differences get larger and larger, he says (Journal of Sleep Research, vol16, p 170).
This has implications for all of us, especially those in professions where staying awake is a life-or-death matter (see ground control to Major Tom).
If you're doing 100 kilometers per hour on a highway and you have a lapse, your fingers go lax on the steering wheel and you drift off the road at a 4 – degree angle, says Dinges.
Two seconds is all it takes to be completely out of your lane.
Up to 20 percent of traffic accidents are fatigue-related.
Brain imaging has recently revealed a mental back-up system in people who remain alert when sleep-deprived (Journal of Neuroscience, vol 29, p 7948).
While other people have reducted brain activity when tired, sleep-resistant individuals manage to maintain their brain activity levels.
More interestingly, they also recruit new areas to help compensate for having been awake for so long.
These people were selected for the study because they had a gene variant found in around 40 percent of people that is thought to be associated with resistance to sleep deprivation.
It seems likely that such people are also less prone to state dissociation, although this has not yet been tested.
Another group who appear to be more vigilant than most are people who suffer from primary insomnia – insomnia not associated with any other condition.
There is evidence to suggest they are in a constant state of hyperarousal, with relatively high metabolic rates and high levels of the stress hormone cortisol.
It's as though somebody just cranked up their alertness over 24 hours, so they are more alert at night, but they are also more alert in the day, says Mahowald.
As the blur between sleep and wakefulness becomes more widely accepted, researchers are devising techniques for capturing the brain's fleeting lapses and vacillations.
For example, neuroscientist Giulio Tononi of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, is eavesdropping on sleeping brains using EEGs with 256 electrodes rather than the more usual 32, to improve spatial resolution and help him catch the brain in the act of mosaic napping.
Microsleeps are just the tip of the iceberg, Tononi says.
He is particularly concerned by the possiblity that parts of our brain might be going offline without us even realising it.
In many respects, it would be like having a temporary mental disorder without anybody, including yourself, being aware of it, he says.
Forgetfulness and daydreaming could be examples of this, but so could more bizzare and even criminal behaviours (See When a crime is not a crime, page 32).
Meanwhile, Pierre Maquet at the University of Liège, in Belgium has started to use fMRI to chart the patterns of brain activity associated with different sleep states.
His team is already finding that the distinctions between sleep and wakefulness look quite different when you compare patterns of activity across the whole brain, including deep structures, as opposed to using EEG, which measures activity in just the outer few millimetres of the cortex.
Lurking in the background is the hope that these approaches will shed light on the vexed issue of what sleep is for.
A leading theory is that it is important for memory consolitadion.
Yet one of the puzzling aspects of the two Italians with status dissociatus is that, despite complete disruption of both their REM and NREM sleep, they showed no memory deficit.
Does this add grist to the mill of those who beileve that sleep has no other purpose than to save energy and keep us safe (New Scientist, 15 March 2008, p 30)?
Or does it mean, as Mahowald believes, that the two individuals were in fact experiencing some sort of mosaic sleep?
Armed with a less black-and-white definition of sleep and wakefulness, and more sensitive tools for measuring them, that question might finally be resolved.
In 1988 a 23-year-old Canadian man named Kenneth Parks went on trial for the murder and attempted murder of his parents-in-law.
One night in the previous year, he drove 23 kilometres across town to their home and attacked them with a tire iron and a knife.
He was acquitted on all counts, on the grounds that he was sleepwalking at that time.
Since then, numerous defendants have pleaded parasomnias – an old- fashioned term for disorders involving partial arousal during sleep that is now mostly used in law.
Mark Pressman, at the Lankenau Hospital in Wynnewood, Pennsylvania, estimates that they are used as a defence in between five and ten cases worldwide each year.
This raises tough issues about criminal responsibility and has been a source of ongoing dispute among lawyers.
One of the most contentious areas concerns men charged with sexual assault who claim sleep-related sexual behaviour, or sexsomnia, as a defence (New Scientist, 28 October 2006, p 40).
Sexsomnia is a variation on sleepwalking and a recognised condition.
The controversy arises when these men claim – sometimes successfully that heavy alcohol consumption provoked their sexsomnia.
My colleagues and I have been actively opposing this defence on the grounds there is no scientific evidence that severe intoxication causes sleepwalking, Pressman says.
But he admits that it is a fiendishly difficult area of law, not least because no sleep study can shed light on what happened in a single individual's brain on a single night in the past.
Every so often, commercial pilots and other professionals, whose jobs require them to be highly vigilant have to take something called the maintenance of wakefulness test.
They must sit in a comfy chair in a dimly lit room and stay awake for 40 minutes, a procedure that is repeated four times over the course of 8 hours.
If they should drop off, this is detected by EEG, eye movement and jaw slackness.
However, these are fairly crude measures and anyway people whose job is on the line tend to be highly motivated to stay awake.
Sleep scientists acknowledge that a more sensitive test is required, and David Dinges at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, believes he has one.
His is a test of reaction time in which subjects have to repeatedly press a button in response to a light going on.
This psychomotor vigilance test is unbelievably sensitive to instability in the boundaries between wakefulness and sleep, Dinges claims.
A shortened version went up to the International Space Station in July, so that the astronauts could put it through its paces.
If it accurately reflects their ability to do their job, it may soon be routinely applied to pilots, nuclear power station operators and others in life-or-death jobs.
The traditional way of distinguishing wakefulness from non-REM and REM sleep is to look for characteristic patterns of brain activity using an EEG, which measures electrical activity in the outer few millimetres from the cortex.
Laura Spinney is a writer in Lausanne, SwitzerlandIt's surprisingly easy for your sense of self to lose touch with your physical being in an out-of-body experience, says Anil Ananthaswamy.
The young man woke feeling dizzy.
He got up and turned around, only to see himself still lying in bed.
He shouted at his sleeping body, shook it, and jumped on it.
The next thing he knew he was lying down again, but now seeing himself standing by the bed and shaking his sleeping body.
Stricken with fear, he jumped out of the window.
His room was on the third floor.
He was found later, badly injured.
What this 21-year-old had just experienced was an out-of-body experience, one of the most peculiar states of consciousness.
It was probably triggered by his epilepsy (Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychaitry, vol 57, p 838).
He didn't want to commit suicide, says Peter Brugger, the young man's neuropsychologist at University Hospital Zurich in Switzerland.
He jumped to find a match between body and self.
He must have been having a seizure.
In the 15 years since that dramatic incident, Brugger and others have come a long way towards understanding out-of-body experiences.
They have narrowed down the cause to malfunctions in a specific brain area and are now working out how these lead to the almost supernatural experience of leaving your own body and observing it from afar.
They are also using out-of-body experiences to tackle a long- standing problem: how we create and maintain a sense of self.
Dramatised to great effect by such authors as Dostoevsky, Wilde, de Maupassant and Poe – some of whom wrote first-hand-knowledge – out-of-body experiences are usually associated with epilepsy, migraines, strokes, brain tumours, drug use and even near-death experiences.
It is clear, though, that people with no obvious neurological disorders can have an out-of-body experience.
By some estimates, about 5 percent of healthy people have one at some point in their lives.
So what exactly is an out-of-body experience?
A definition has recently emerged that involves a set of increasingly bizarre perceptions.
The least severe of these is a doppelgänger experience: your sense the presence of or see a person you know to be yourself, though you remain rooted in your own body.
This often progresses to stage 2, where your sense of self moves back and forth between your real body and your doppelgänger.
This was what Brugger's young patient experienced.
Finally, your self leaves your body altogether and observes it from outside, often an elevated position such as the ceiling.
This split is the most striking feature of an out- of-body experience, says Olaf Blanke, a neurologist at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne.
Surprisingly pleasant
Some out-of-body experiences involve just one of these stages: some all three, in progression.
Bizarrely, many people who have one report it as a pleasant experience.
So what could be going on in the brain to create such a seemingly impossible sensation?
The first substantial clues came in 2002, when Blankes team stumbled across a way to induce a full-blown out-of-body experience.
They were performing exploratory brain surgery on a 43-year-old woman with severe epilepsy to determine which part of her brain to remove in order to cure her.
When they stimulated a region near the back of the brain called the temporoparietal junction (TPJ), the woman reported that she was floating above from her own body and looking down on herself.
This makes some kind of neurological sense.
The TPJ processes visual and touch signals, balance and spatial information from the inner ear, and the proprioceptive sensations from joints, tendons and muscles that tell us where our body parts are in relation to one another.
Its job is to meld these together to create a feeling of embodiment: a sense of where your body is, and where it ends and the rest of the world begins.
Blanke and colleagues hypothesised that out-of-body experiences arise when, for whatever reason, the TPJ fails to do this properly (Nature, vol 419, p 269).
More evidence later emerged that a malfunctioning TPJ was at the heart of the out- of-body experience.
In 2007, for example, Dirk De Ridder of University Hospital Antwerp in Belgium was trying to help a 63-year-old man with intractable tinnitus.
In a last-ditch attempt to silence the ringing in his ears, Ridders team implanted electrodes near the patient's TPJ.
It did not cure his tinnitus, but it did lead to him experiencing something close to an out-of-body experience: he would feel his self shift about 50 centimeters behind and to the left of his body.
The feeling would last more than 15 seconds, long enough to carry out PET scans of his brain.
Sure enough, the team found that TPJ was activated during the experiences.
Insights from neurological disorders or brain surgery can only take you so far, however, not least because cases are rare.
Larger-scale studies are required, and to achieve this Blanke and others have used a technique called own-body transformation tasks to force the brain to do things that is seemingly does during an out-of-body experience.
In these experiments, subjects are shown a sequence of brief glimpses of cartoon figures wearing a glove on one hand.
Some of the figures face the subject, others have their back turned (see diagram, below).
The task is to imagine yourself in the position of the cartoon figure in order to work out with hand the glove is on.
To do this, you may have to mentally rotate you own body as one image succeeds another.
As volunteers performed these tasks, the researches mapped their brain activity with an EEG and found that the TPJ was activated when the volunteers imagined themselves in a position different from their actual orientation – an out-of- body position.
The team also zapped the TPJ with transcranial magnetic stimulation, a non- invasive technique that can temporarily disable parts of the brain.
With a disrupted TPJ, volunteers took significantly longer to do the own-body transformation task (The Journal of Neuroscience, vol 25, p 550).
Other brain regions have been implicated too, including ones close to the TPJ.
The emerging consensus is that when these regions are working well, we feel at one with our body.
But disrupt them, and our sense of embodiment can float away.
This does not, however, explain the most striking feature of out-of-body experiences.
It's a great puzzle why people, from their out-of-body locations, visualise not only their bodies but things around them, such as other people, says Brugger.
Where does this information come from?
One line of evidence comes from the condition known as sleep paralysis, in which healthy people find their body immobilised as in sleep despite being conscious (See The twilight zone).
In a survey of nearly 12, 000 people who had experienced sleep paralysis, Allan Cheyne of the University of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada, found that many reported sensations similar to out-of-body experiences.
These included floating of of their body and turning back to look at it.
Cheyne suggests that this might be the result of conflicts of information in the brain.
During sleep paralysis, it is possible to enter a REM-like state in which you dream of moving or flying.
Under these circumstances you are conscious of a sensation of movement, yet your brain is aware that your body cannot move.
In an attempt to resolve this sensory conflict, the brain cuts the sense of self loose (Cortex, vol 45, p 201).
It resolvess by splitting the self from its body, says Cheyne.
The self seems to go with the movement and the body gets left behind.
Perhaps similar sensory conflicts cause classic out-of-body experiences.
Brugger, meanwhile, has a suggestion for how someone might see things even though their eyes are shut, based on one of his patients who reported an out-of-body experience.
According to this patient's father, who was sitting by the bedside, he had his eyes closed.
Yet he later reported seeing, from a perspective above his bed, his father going to the bathroom, returning with a wet towel and towelling his forehead.
The patient presumably heard his father walk to the bathroom and run some water, and must have felt the wet towel on his head.
Brugger speculates that his brain converted those stimull into a visual image, not unlike what happens in synaesthesia.
This still does not, however, explain the external vantage point.
Its not clear how the brain constructs that, says cognitive philosopher Thomas Metzinger of the Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz, Germany.
Metzinger does have a suggestion.
Imagine an episode from a recent holiday.
Do you visualise it from a first-person perspective, or from a third-person perspective with yourself in the scene?
Surprisingly, most of us do the latter.
In encoding visaul memories, the brain already uses an external perspective, says Metzinger.
We don't know much about why and how, but if something is extracted from such a database (during an out-of-body experience), there may be material for seeing oneself from the outside.
Whatever the mechanism, the study of out-of-body experiences promises to help answer a profound question in neuroscience and philosophy: how does self- consciousness emerge?
Its abundantly clear to us that we have a sense of self that resides, most of the time, in our bodies.
Yet it is also clear from out-of-body experiences that the sense of self can seemingly detach from your physical body.
So how are the self and the body related?
To address that question, Metzinger has teamed up with Blanke and his colleagues in an experiment that induces an out-of-body experience in healthy volunteers.
They film each volunteer from behind and project the image into a head- mounted display worn by the volunter so that they see an image of themselves standing about 2 metres in front.
The experimenters then stroke the volunteers back – which the volunteers see being done to their virtual self.
This creates sensory conflict, and many reported feeling their sense of self migrating out of their physical bodies and towards the virtual one (Science, vol 317, p 1096).
To Metzinger, these experiments demonstrate that self-consciousness begins with the feeling of owning a body, but there is more to self – consciousness than the mere feelings of emodiment.
Selfhood has many components, says Metzinger.
We are trying to fill them in, building block by building block.
This is just the beginning.
In an own-body transformation task, cartoon figures are flashed onto a screen, one at a time, at random, every second.
Volunteers are asked to put themselves in the position of the character to work out which hand the glove is on.
The task requires them to mentally rotate their body in space and causes patterns of brain activity similar to that of an out-of-body experience.
Anil Ananthaswamy is a contributing editor for New Scientist.
Look into my eyes Hypnosis can reveal the bizzare ways in which our brains misbehave, says Nicola Jones.
I am about to have my left leg paralysed, my arm taken over by an alien force and, quite possibly, be made blind.
I confess I'm a bit nervous.
But also, strangely, I hope it all works.
These insults to my body will not be inflicted with a scalpel, but instead induced using hypnosis.
The effects, if they occur, will only be temporary, my hypnotist, David Oakley, reassures me.
Its all being done in the interest of science.
Oakley is an emeritus professor at University College London.
He is one of a handful of researchers who hope that by taking hypnosis seriously, they will help to dispel its quackerytainted image (see What's hypnosis?).
I think hypnosis is underaccepted and undervalued, says psychologist Irving Kirsch at the University of Hull, UK.
Partly because of lurid tales published in books and movies, which lead to views of hypnosis as a strange and unbelievable state.Still many pepole scoff.
Aside from improving the reputation of hypnosis, Oakley also aims to better understand some of the strangest neurological conditions out there.
The idea is to use hypnosis to induce symptoms in otherwise healthy people.
This creates virtual patients with symptoms that can literally be switched on and off with a snap of the fingers, making it easier to study the abnormal brain activity that causes them.
It's like reverse engineering, says Peter Halligan, a neuropsychologist at Cardiff University, UK, who works with Oakley.
It's only when things break down that you appreciate the mechanism involved.
For their experiments, Halligan and Oakley have focused on a range of rare and bizzare conditions.
They include hysterical blindness (the person cannot see but has no perceptible damage to their eyes or brain), hysterical paralysis (an inability to move a part of the body despite having no physical injury – the same limb may move while the person is asleep), prospagnosia (an inability to recognise faces despite having good sight), alien limb syndrome (the feeling that an arm or leg is acting of its own accord), visual neglect (total lack of awareness of half of the visual field) and Capgras syndrome (a delusional belief that a loved one has been replaced by an imposter).
These are all conditions that the researchers believe can be recreated in healthy people using hypnosis.
Many of them are somatoform disorders, in which people develop physical symptoms in the absence of an identifiable physical cause.
All are rare, and when they occur it is often in peopole with other problems, such as depression or schizophrenia, making them hard to study.
To get a sense of what these conditions are like and how it feels to be hypnotised I have come, with some trepidation, to University College London's psychology department.
As we sit in an ordinary office, Oakley guides me through a relaxation procedure, starting by asking me to imagine that I am in a happy familiar place.
I soon feel much as I do at the end of a yoga class – calm and relaxed.
I expected to feel dizzy or drunk, or perhaps to forget where I was, but the street traffic is still audible and I feel normal.
Then Oakley suggests that my left leg is unable to move, and my leg starts to tingle with pins and needles.
I am surprised by this, but go with it.
When he asks me to lift my leg, I can do it, but only slowly, awkwardly and with difficulty.
This means the procedure has partially worked, I'm probably slightly above average on the hypnotisability scale, says Oakley (see How hypnotisable are you?).
Had I been in the 10 percent of people who are highly hypnotisable I would have ceased to hear the traffic and been unable to lift my leg at all.
Hypnotic elite Julia Russell, a schoolteacher and former student of Oakley's, is one of the hypnotic elite.
Russell participated in one of Oakleys recent alien limb experiments.
She describes one experience as quite extraordinary.
During hypnosis, Russells arm was moved in a number of ways, first manually.
Then the idea was suggested to her that an experimenter would enter the room who wanted her arm to move.
When the experimenter appeared, Russell says she felt a bizarre sensation.
I was being bypassed.
She wanted my hand to move, so it did, and I wasnt involved in the movement at all, she says.
It was as if her thoughts were affecting my behaviour directly, without my thoughts intervening.
Can the activity in a hypnotised brain really mimic what's going on in someone with a real disorder?
And, if it can, what can it teach us?
Oakley and Halligan are convinced their virtual patients are experiencing some of the same brain changes as people with genuine disorders.
Halligan tells how they once induced a case of visual neglect in a volunteer by suggesting that the left side of his visual field would cease to exist.
They then asked him to copy a picture with a dozen objects scattered on the page.
Most hypnotised pepole given this instruction would copy only the objects on the right hand side of the page, as most people with visual neglect do.
But this volunteer drew the right-hand side of every object on the page.
That's not something you would intuitively expect, says Halligan, but it is also seen in real patients.
The similarities reach into brain, he says.
Halligan and colleagues put 12 highly hypnotisable students under an then either suggested that their left leg was paralysed, or told them to merely pretend that their left leg was paralysed, with the promise of a reward if they managed to fool an investigator, unaware of which group the participants were in, couldn't tell who was faking paralysis – until they saw scans of the volunteers brains.
There were clear differences in brain activity.
One of the brain areas that was highly active, or lit up, in the hypnotically paralysed volunteers was the right orbifrontal cortex – a region thought to be involved with emotional inhibition, and which has also been seen to light up in hysterical paralysis.
Yann Cojan at the University of Geneva in Switzerland recently tried a similar experiment where volunteers left hands were paralysed by hypnosis.
He and his colleagues also found that brain scans distinguished those under hypnotic suggestion from the fakers.
Same, but different
However, both groups also saw some differences in brain activity between hypnotic paralysis and people with genuine cases of hysterival paralysis.
Cojan – who saw greater differences than Halligan – thinks this means that, while interesting as a research tool, hypnosis is unlikely to produce clinically relevant results for people with real disorders.
Nevertheless, their studies have lead them to some interesting conclusions.
For example, the work suggests that brain areas normally associated with the intentional inhibition of movement are not active in people with hysterical paralysis nor hypnotised volunteers, suggesting that it really is the case that they cannot, rather than will not, move.
Whether such studies will help to develop treatments for patients remains to be seen.
Perhaps the biggest impact will simply be to convince people that the conditions are real.
These patients can run into aspects of the healthcare system that are very pejorative – theyre constantly told it's all in your head,  says Antony Feinstein of the Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center in Toronto, Canada.
We say yes, it's all in your head, because your brain is in your head.
Being able to show both doctors and patients that the conditions are being taken seriously is a big step forward.
At present, treatments for the disorders include talking therapy, hypnotic suggestion to relieve symptoms and even physiotherapy - which sometimes gives a person an excuse to get better.
In many cases, these approaches are unsuccessful.
A better understanding of the pathways in the brain that have gone away should help to direct future therapies.
If we understand how to treat it, says Halligan.
Back in the hypnotists chair, Oakley moves on to the next virtual disorder.
He includes in me a sensation that my right hand is being lifted by a balloon, a gentle approximation of alien limb syndrome.
My wrist inches upwards.
He next suggests that when I open my eyes, I will not be able to see anyting on in the left of my visaul field, an analogue of visual neglect.
I open them slowly, fascinated to see what this will be like, but my vision is normal.
I feel strangely disappointed, but Oakley tells me that even highly hypnotisable people only rarely experience this effect.
The only thing I seem to have lost permanently is a little bit of time, when Oakley asks me how long I think I have been under, I reply, about 20 minutes.
He grins when he tells me it was over an hour.
Time compression is a commmon side effect of hypnosis, he says.
Although I failed to experience full alien limb syndrome or visual neglect, my thinking on hypnosis has been changed.
I am more convinced of the power of the phenomenon after experiencing it for myself.
Though I can't help suspecting that Oakley planted the thought in my head while I was under Nicola Jones is a writer based in Vancouver, Canada What is hypnosis?
Some say hypnosis is nothing more than people acting how the think they are meant to act when hypnotised.
In some instances this may be true, but to dismiss hypnosis vastly underestimates its power, much like dismissing a plaebo as just a sugar pill glosses over the fact that it can help someone get better.
Severe burn patients, some of whom are driven psychotic from pain even when given morphine, have been made calm through hypnosis, says David Oakley, an emeritus professor at University College London.
When Michael Nash, a psychologist at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville, goes to the dentist for some minor drilling work, he shuns anaesthesia in favour of self-hypnosis.
The dentist is always impresssed, he says.
Since 1996, the US National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, have deemed hypnosis an effective method of pain relief, and more recent meta-analyses have confirmed its usefulness in surgery.
Some studies have shown that hypnosis can have a greater pain-relief effect than placebo pills.
Amir Raz of McGill University in Montreal, Canada, has demonstrated another powerful effect, which often silences critics who say hypnotised volunteers are just faking it.
In general, if you show somebody the name of a colour written in a different colour – red written in blue, for example – and ask them the colour of the ink, they pause.
This is a very deeply ingrained effect, but Razhas showed that using hypnosis to suggest a volunteer cannot read can eliminate this delay.
When scientists try to measure these funky things, its really important to have objective measures, says Raz.
Wherher there is a pattern of brain activity characteristic of hypnosis is still up for debate.
Some recent research hints that hypnotised volunteers have less mind wander when in a resting state.
But it's hard to say whether this is due to hypnosis or the relaxation techniques to instigate it.
How hypnotisable are you?
Hold your arms out straight in front of you, palms facing each other.
Then close your eyes and imagien a magnetic force pulling your hands together, and really concentrate for a minute on what that might feel like.
Now open your eyes.
Have your arms moved together?
They do for about 70 percent of people.
This group is considered suggestible, and so probably hypnotisable.
The best way to assess someone's susceptibility to hypnotism is simply to hypnotise them and see what happens.
There are various defined scales – such as the Stanford hypnotic susceptibility scale – that rank a person's hypnotisability based on their response to a dozen suggested tasks under hypnosis – from feeling your hands being drawn together as if by magnets, to feeling your arm being lifted by a balloon.
A strong indicator of how someone will perform on such tests is simply how susceptible they are to suggestion under normal circumstances.
People who lose themselves so completely in movies or books that they believe the characters to be real, who go into a kind of trance when doing endurance sports, or who had imiginary friends as children, are usually hypnotisable.
The motivation to be hypnotised also helps.
Some studies hint that our hypnotisability is deeply ingrained.
When 50 people were re-tested on the Stanford scale after a 25-year gap, their scores stayed remarkably consistent.
James Horton at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville has even found physical brain differences: highly hypnotisable participants had a 30 percent bigger rostrum, a part of hte brain thought to help focus attention.
A few studies have shown that hypnotisability may be hereditary, and some researches – including Amir Raz of McGill University in Montreal, Canada – are trying to track the genes involved.
Curiously, most of the scientists interviewed for this piece categorised themselves as only mediocre on the scale of hypnotisability.
In general, researchers tend to dissect and criticise and re-evaluate, says hypnosis researcher David Spiegel of Stanford University, California. And that's not a very hypnotic state of mind.
