They do.
Excitement, novelty, risk, the company of peers.
These traits may seem to add up to nothing more than doing foolish new stuff with friends.
Look deeper, however, and you see that these traits that define adolescence make us more adaptive, both as individuals and as a species.
But anthropologists have found that virtually all the world's cultures recognize adolescence as a distinct period in which adolescents prefer novelty, excitement, and peers.
This near- universal recognition sinks the notion that it's a cultural construct.
Culture clearly shapes adolescence.
It influences its expression and possibly its length.
It can magnify its manifestations.
Yet culture does not create adolescence.
The period's uniqueness rises from genes and developmental processes that have been selected for over thousands of generations because they play an amplified role during this key transitional period: producing a creature optimally primed to leave a safe home and move into unfamiliar territory.
The move outward from home is the most difficult thing that humans do, as well as the most critical—not just for individuals but for a species that has shown an unmatched ability to master challenging new environments.
In scientific terms, teenagers can be a pain in the ass.
But they are quite possibly the most fully, crucially adaptive human beings around.
Without them, humanity might not have so readily spread across the globe.
This adaptive-adolescence view, however accurate, can be tricky to come to terms with— the more so for parents dealing with teens in their most trying, contrary, or flat-out scary moments.
It's reassuring to recast worrisome aspects as signs of an organism learning how to negotiate its surroundings.
But natural selection swings a sharp edge, and the teen's sloppier moments can bring unbearable consequences.
We may not run the risk of being killed in ritualistic battles or being eaten by leopards, but drugs, drinking, driving, and crime take a mighty toll.
My son lives, and thrives, sans car, at college.
Some of his high school friends, however, died during their driving experiments.
Our children wield their adaptive plasticity amid small but horrific risks.
We parents, of course, often stumble too, as we try to walk the blurry line between helping and hindering our kids as they adapt to adulthood.
The United States spends about a billion dollars a year on programs to counsel adolescents on violence, gangs, suicide, sex, substance abuse, and other potential pitfalls.
Few of them work.
Yet we can and do help.
We can ward off some of the world's worst hazards and nudge adolescents toward appropriate responses to the rest.
Studies show that when parents engage and guide their teens with a light but steady hand, staying connected but allowing independence, their kids generally do much better in life.
Adolescents want to learn primarily, but not entirely, from their friends.
At some level and at some times (and it's the parent's job to spot when), the teen recognizes that the parent can offer certain kernels of wisdom—knowledge valued not because it comes from parental authority but because it comes from the parent's own struggles to learn how the world turns.
The teen rightly perceives that she must understand not just her parents' world but also the one she is entering.
Yet if allowed to, she can appreciate that her parents once faced the same problems and may remember a few things worth knowing.
Meanwhile, in times of doubt, take inspiration in one last distinction of the teen brain—a final key to both its clumsiness and its remarkable adaptability.
This is the prolonged plasticity of those late-developing frontal areas as they slowly mature.
As noted earlier, these areas are the last to lay down the fatty myelin insulation—the brain's white matter—that speeds transmission.
And at first glance this seems like bad news:
If we need these areas for the complex task of entering the world, why aren't they running at full speed when the challenges are most daunting?
The answer is that speed comes at the price of flexibility.
While a myelin coating greatly accelerates an axon's bandwidth, it also inhibits the growth of new branches from the axon.
According to Douglas Fields, an NIH neuroscientist who has spent years studying myelin, This makes the period when a brain area lays down myelin a sort of crucial period of learning—the wiring is getting upgraded, but once that's done, it's harder to change.
The window in which experience can best rewire those connections is highly specific to each brain area.
Thus the brain's language centers acquire their insulation most heavily in the first 13 years, when a child is learning language.
The completed insulation consolidates those gains—but makes further gains, such as second languages, far harder to come by.
So it is with the forebrain's myelination during the late teens and early 20s.
This delayed completion—a withholding of readiness—heightens flexibility just as we confront and enter the world that we will face as adults.
This long, slow, back-to-front developmental wave, completed only in the mid-20s, appears to be a uniquely human adaptation.
It may be one of our most consequential.
In her writings, Julian mentions in several passages that she is ignorant and illiterate.
These statements about her ignorance have given much puzzlement to the scholars:
But God forbid that you should say or assume that I am a teacher, for that is not and never was my intention; for I am a woman, ignorant, weak and frail.
But I know very well that what I am saying I have received by the revelation of him who is the sovereign teacher.
This revelation was made to a simple, unlettered creature.
If we take Julian’s protestation of ignorance at face value, we can assume that, being unable to read or write, she dictated her book to a scribe, which was a common practice in the Middle Ages.
But we can equally assume that with these statements she is only trying to emphasize that the revelations received have no origin from her own wit or theological education, but possess an entirely supernatural character, or that she is simply applying a rhetorical device that appeals for benevolence from the readers.
Another hypothesis is that she is just echoing the words of St. Paul about the primacy of love, which surpasses all knowledge and science: And though I have the power of prophecy, to penetrate all mysteries and knowledge, and though I have all the faith necessary to move mountains – if I am without love, I am nothing” (1 Cor 13, 2).
In fact, Julian tells us the same about herself in clear terms: I am not good because of the revelation, but only if I love God better”.
Julian does not want to present herself as a teacher, but rather as a pilgrim who comes back home, eager to share with others what she has seen in a foreign land.
And yet, we can hardly imagine she had no education at all.
Though her literary style is very simple and neat, some of the formulations of the deepest mysteries of God in small, succinct phrases, her use of simile and rhyme, reveal extraordinary rhetorical art.
From a literary point of view, her book merits a pioneering position in English Literature along with Geoffrey Chaucer, who was her contemporary.
In fact, she was the first woman to write a book in the English language.
But her writing has also a certain resemblance to the style of the Old Testament Wisdom Literature or to the rhetoric of the Church Fathers.
This is especially true of some antithetic affirmations when she writes, for example: For we do not fall in the sight of God, and we do not stand in our own sight”; or: For God sees in one way and man sees in another way”.
Besides, her Showings exhibit a profound familiarity with the Latin Vulgate Bible and with a wide range of other spiritual writings of the western theological and monastic tradition.
In particular, her knowledge of the Sacred Scripture is most impressive: she incorporates it so well in her text that there is virtually no distinction between quotation and her own words.
It is possible to assume that she entered a religious order where she gained her academic training.
This was, in fact, almost the only possibility for a girl or a woman of the fourteenth century to acquire education.
If she had been a laywoman, most probably she would have had no access whatsoever to instruction.
According to some scholars Julian belonged to a community of Beguines.
In fact, the Beguines lived in Norwich and possessed at least three houses there which were attached to the churches of St. Lawrence, St. Smithin and St. Peter Hungate.
But there is a historical fact that speaks against the association of Julian with this religious community: there were no Beguines in Norwich at Julian’s time yet.
However, there are some factors that indicate her connections with the Benedictines who had a house for nuns at Carrow, outside Norwich city walls.
Carrow Abbey, one of the most famous nunneries of England, in Julian’s time had a boarding school for girls and boys.
We cannot be sure if Julian frequented this school as a girl and subsequently became a nun there, but there is a significant passage in the Showings where the Lord reminds her of the service in her youth, which might be an allusion to the consecrated life in a religious order:
I thank you for your service and your labour in your youth”.
Besides, the Abbey held the benefice of St. Julian’s Church.
Francis Blomfield leaves us another precious piece of information regarding Carrow Abbey of Norwich:
This nunnery for many years had been a school or place of education for the young ladies of the chief families of the diocese, who boarded with and were educated by the nuns.
There is also other evidence that points in this direction.
It used to be a custom among the Benedictines to initiate conversation with the words Benedicite Dominus”, and Julian uses this several times in her book.
Moreover, the title Dame Julian”, given to her by Margery, is that of a Benedictine nun.
Finally, her manuscripts were preserved from destruction by Benedictine and Brigittine convents.
All this indicates in favour of her relation to the Benedictine family where she might have received her formation and education.
It is God who takes the initiative, but the human creature must respond.
In fact, supernatural revelations are not mere transcriptions of the mystical experience that would make the visionary a merely passive instrument in the hands of God.
Julian’s activity and personal commitment can be seen throughout her writing.
She not only ponders actively on what she sees and hears, but every now and then she asks questions, expresses her doubts and even ventures to wrangle with the Lord over the meaning of his words when they seem to be in apparent contradiction with Scripture and Church teaching.
Therefore, the book of the Showings is also the fruit of the personal reflection, prayer and asceticism of Mother Julian.
It is handed down to us in two versions.
There is a Short Text probably written very soon after the revelations, and a Long Text written around twenty years later, in 1393, after she had pondered on their meaning.
The density of her revelations, which took place within such a short time, makes her visions comparable to a dense package of grace that requires a lot of time to unravel in order to penetrate fully into its meaning.
The span of so many years did not erase what she saw, for the visions were followed by further inward instructions” that she received from the Lord for almost twenty years.
There are some noteworthy differences between the two versions.
For example, the short version does not contain any mention of the famous allegory of the Lord and the servant in Chapter 51, nor of her maternal image of God based on the allegory, which shows how much the Long Text is also the fruit of her profound meditation on the visions.
Her book of revelations, after its experiential and contemplative level, acquires a doctrinal dimension, as we shall see in the second part.
In her revelations Julian touches on profound issues of dogmatic theology: the Holy Trinity, creation, sin, incarnation, redemption, Church, Eucharist, the Virgin Mary and eschatology.
Her primary focus, however, is on the mystery of the infinite love of God for his creatures, manifested through the Passion of Jesus Christ.
This constitutes a prism through which she views all other mysteries.
In fact, God’s love represents the fundamental revelation which is expounded in sixteen showings.
This is how Julian characterizes her showings in the introduction to the Long Text:
This is a revelation of love which Jesus Christ, our endless bliss, made in sixteen showings, of which the first is about his precious crowning of thorns… in which all the revelations which follow are founded and connected.
Julian never gave her book a title, but a revelation of love” could make up for one, as it expresses adequately the essence of her visions.
At the end of the Long Text, as Julian asks for the meaning of all these showings she receives this answer form the Lord:
What, do you wish to know your Lord’s meaning in this thing?
Know it well, love was his meaning.
Who reveals it to you?
Love.
What did he reveal to you?
Love.
Why does he reveal it to you?
For love…
So I was taught that love is our Lord’s meaning (LT 342).
In retrospect, Julian summarizes her revelations simply as a lesson of love:
All this familiar revelation of our courteous Lord is a lesson of love, and a sweet, gracious teaching from himself, in comforting of our soul.
Though Julian ponders on the deepest mysteries of theology, she does it with so much simplicity and clarity of expression, that her writing becomes accessible not only to an elite of some sophisticated thinkers, but to all her fellow Christians who are in search of God.
This is one of the reasons why she writes not in Latin, but in the Middle English dialect of Norwich, even though, in this way, she ran the risk of being associated with the Lollard movement whose books came under the censorship of Archbishop Arundel.
Yet, from her personal testimony, we see that she did love the Lord in a very unique and pure way, that is to say, not because of the visions, graces or gifts she received from him, but because he deserves it.
Finally, Julian’s work appears so exceptional for one more aspect.
It represents an integration of various elements that we rarely find so finely balanced in theological and spiritual works of other authors.
In her method and teaching she unifies the mystical and the human, the ordinary and the extraordinary, knowledge and spirituality, philosophy and theology, poetry and dogmatic speech.
Out of this structural unity and equilibrium follows another particularity of the Showings:
the alternation of bodily and spiritual visions in connection with locutions that she perceives in her soul.
She herself comments on it all saying: All this was shown in three parts, that is to say, by bodily vision and by words formed in my understanding and by spiritual vision”.
The harmonious integration of intellect, prayer and mystical experience in the Showings renders Julian an excellent example of what H. U. von Balthasar, in his famous statement on the relationship between theology and sanctity, labelled as a kneeling theology”, a theology at prayer”, in contrast to a theology done at the desk.
Julian can be classified as a member of the long tradition of holy theologians – from the time of the Church Fathers up to the Middle Ages – who knew no separation between theology and sanctity, study and adoration.
There are no originals either of the Short Text or of the Long Text.
Whereas today there is available a great number of modernized versions of the revelations, Julian’s Showings became known to the public only after the English Benedictine Serenus Cressy published the Long Text in 1670.
Until the mid-17th century there existed only a few surviving copies of her writings.
The possible reason for this lack is to be found in the destruction of manuscripts and printed books during the persecution of Catholics in the time of the Reformation.
Of the surviving Julian’s manuscripts, all but one, the so-called Amherst Manuscript, were discovered outside England.
Of the Short Text the significant Amherst Manuscript Additional 37790 is preserved in the British Library.
The introduction, written by Julian’s scribe, refers to A. D. 1413”, and states that Julian was still alive.
It does not necessarily imply that the Short Text of the Showings was written in 1413.
Maybe, this observation is an editorial addition to an earlier text, whereas the manuscript itself is only a copy of posterior date.
Of the Long Text there is an anthology of extracts in the Paris Manuscript Anglais 40 of the Bibliothèque Nationale that the catalogue dates to the 16th century.
It is the most important long-text manuscript, which predates the dissolution of the monasteries in England, and it might have served Cressy as supporting material for his own version while he served as chaplain in Paris to the exiled nuns in the English Benedictine monastery.
Anther manuscript that contains excerpts of Julian’s Showings is The Westminster Cathedral Manuscript the first folio of which carries the date 1368, but this must be a miscalculation since it would precede the vision of 1373.
Most probably it was written about 1500.
Moreover, the appearance of this manuscript is similar to the Paris manuscript, both being written on ruled lines between ruled margins.
Both the Amherst and Westminster Manuscripts are a florilegium of medieval spiritual writings that include Psalm commentaries, Walter Hilton’s Ladder of Perfection, Golden Epistle ascribed to St. Bernhard, Henry Suso’s Horologium Sapientiae, John Ruysbroek’s Sparkling Stone, Marguerite Porete’s Mirror of Simple Souls or Archbishop Arundel’s Constitution.
The fact that Julian’s Showings were inserted there, shows how much esteem she enjoyed among the masters of the spiritual life.
Finally, there are two further manuscripts of Julian’s Long Text in the British Library:
Sloan Manuscripts 2499 and 3705.
Update:
The riverside research station of Iain Douglas-Hamilton, Save the Elephants, in northern Kenya, was destroyed on the morning of March 4, 2010 by a flash flood, which resulted from a storm many miles upstream.
Although no one was killed, due to hasty evacuation, buildings and equipment were wrecked, computers and cameras were washed away, and some precious data were lost.
The nearby tourist camp of Douglas-Hamilton's wife Oria, Elephant Watch, and seven other lodges were also devastated.
Readers who wish to help the rebuilding effort can do so through the website savetheelephants.org.
The biologist Iain Douglas-Hamilton is walking up on an elephant, a sizable young female, nubile and shy.
Her name, as she's known to him and his colleagues, is Anne.
She stands half-concealed within a cluster of trees on the knob of a hill in remote northern Kenya, browsing tranquilly with several members of her family.
Around her neck hangs a stout leather collar along which, at the crest of her shoulders, like a tiny porkpie hat, sits an electronic transmitter.
That transmitter has allowed Douglas-Hamilton, flying in by Cessna, proceeding here on foot through the tall grass and acacia scrub, to find her.
She's oblivious to him, or maybe just not interested.
He wants a clear look at the collar.
He has heard reports that it may be too tight—that she has grown into it since having been tranquilizer-darted, fitted, and thus recruited as a source of research data.
Ordinarily, Douglas-Hamilton does his elephant- watching more cautiously, from the safe containment of a Land Cruiser, but no vehicle can drive this terrain, and Anne's comfort and health are at issue.