Could a lice-ridden peasant really feel passion?
Easily, as it turns out.
Scientists now believe that romance is panhuman, embedded in our brains since Pleistocene times.
In a study of 166 cultures, anthropologists Wiliam Jankowiak and Edward Fischer observed evidence of passionate love in 147 of them.
In another study men and women from Europe, Japan, and the Philippines were asked to fill out a survey to measure their experiences of passionate love.
All three groups professed feeling passion with the same searing intensity.
But though romantic love may be universal, its cultural expression is not.
To the Fulbe tribe of northern Cameroon, poise matters more than passion.
Men who spend too much time with their wives are taunted, and those who are weak-kneed are thought to have fallen under a dangerous spell.
Love may be inevitable, but for the Fulbe its manifestations are shameful, equated with sickness and social impairment.
In India romantic love has traditionally been seen as dangerous, a threat to a well-crafted caste system in which marriages are arranged as a means of preserving lineage and bloodlines.
Thus the gruesome tales, the warnings embedded in fables about what happens when one‘s wayward impulses take over.
Today love marriages appear to be on the rise in India, often in defiance of parents‘ wishes.
The triumph of romantic love is celebrated in Bollywood films.
Yet most Indians still believe arranged marriages are more likely to succeed than love marriages.
In one survey of Indian college students, 76 percent said they‘d marry someone with all the right qualities even if they weren‘t in love with the person (compared with only 14 percent of Americans).
Marriage is considered too important a step to leave to chance.
Renu Dinakaran is a striking 45-year-old woman who lives in Bangalore, India.
When I meet her, she is dressed in Western-style clothes —black leggings and a T-shirt.
Renu lives in a well- appointed apartment in this thronging city, where cows sleep on the highways as tiny cars whiz around them, plumes of black smoke rising from their sooty pipes.
Renu was born into a traditional Indian family where an arranged marriage was expected.
She was not an arranged kind of person, though, emerging from her earliest days as a fierce tennis player, too sweaty for saris, and smarter than many of the men around her.
Nevertheless at the age of 17 she was married off to a first cousin, a man she barely knew, a man she wanted to learn to love, but couldn‘t.
Renu considers many arranged marriages to be acts of state-sanctioned rape.
Renu hoped to fall in love with her husband, but the more years that passed, the less love she felt, until, at the end, she was shrunken, bitter, hiding behind the curtains of her in-laws‘ bungalow, looking with longing at the couple on the balcony across from theirs.
It was so obvious to me that couple had married for love, and I envied them.
I really did.
It hurt me so much to see how they stood together, how they went shopping for bread and eggs.
Exhausted from being forced into confinement, from being swaddled in saris that made it difficult to move, from resisting the pressure to eat off her husband‘s plate, Renu did what traditional Indian culture forbids one to do.
She left.
By this time she had had two children.
She took them with her.
In her mind was an old movie she‘d seen on TV, a movie so strange and enticing to her, so utterly confounding and comforting at the same time, that she couldn‘t get it out of her head.
It was 1986.
The movie was Love Story.
Before I saw movies like Love Story, I didn‘t realize the power that love can have, she says.
Renu was lucky in the end.
In Mumbai she met a man named Anil, and it was then, for the first time, that she felt passion.
When I first met Anil, it was like nothing I‘d ever experienced.
He was the first man I ever had an orgasm with.
I was high, just high, all the time.
And I knew it wouldn‘t last, couldn‘t last, and so that infused it with a sweet sense of longing, almost as though we were watching the end approach while we were also discovering each other.
When Renu speaks of the end, she does not, to be sure, mean the end of her relationship with Anil; she means the end of a certain stage.
The two are still happily married, companionable, loving if not ―in love, with a playful black dachshund they bought together.
Their relationship, once so full of fire, now seems to simmer along at an even temperature, enough to keep them well fed and warm.
They are grateful.
Would I want all that passion back? Renu asks.
Sometimes, yes.
But to tell you the truth, it was exhausting.
From a physiological point of view, this couple has moved from the dopamine-drenched state of romantic love to the relative quiet of an oxytocin-induced attachment.
Oxytocin is a hormone that promotes a feeling of connection, bonding.
Prairie voles, animals with high levels of oxytocin, mate for life.
When scientists block oxytocin receptors in these rodents, the animals don‘t form monogamous bonds and tend to roam.
Some researchers speculate that autism, a disorder marked by a profound inability to forge and maintain social connections, is linked to an oxytocin deficiency.
Scientists have been experimenting by treating autistic people with oxytocin, which in some cases has helped alleviate their symptoms.
In long-term relationships that work—like Renu and Anil‘s—oxytocin is believed to be abundant in both partners.
In long-term relationships that never get off the ground, like Renu and her first husband‘s, or that crumble once the high is gone, chances are the couple has not found a way to stimulate or sustain oxytocin production.
But there are things you can do to help it along, says Helen Fisher.
Massage.
Make love.
These things trigger oxytocin and thus make you feel much closer to your partner.
Well, I suppose that‘s good advice, but it‘s based on the assumption that you still want to have sex with that boring windbag of a husband.
Should you fake-it-till-you-make-it?
Yes, says Fisher.
Assuming a fairly healthy relationship, if you have enough orgasms with your partner, you may become attached to him or her.
You will stimulate oxytocin.
It‘s exactly what your mother always said about vegetables: Keep eating your peas.
They are an acquired taste.
Eventually, you will come to like them.
But I have never been a peas person.
It‘s 90 degrees on the day my husband and I depart, from Boston for New York City, to attend a kissing school.
With two kids, two cats, two dogs, a lopsided house, and a questionable school system, we may know how to kiss, but in the rough and tumble of our harried lives we have indeed forgotten how to kiss.
The sky is paved with clouds, the air as sticky as jam in our hands and on our necks.
The Kissing School, run by Cherie Byrd, a therapist from Seattle, is being held on the 12th floor of a run-down building in Manhattan.
Inside, the room is whitewashed; a tiled table holds bottles of banana and apricot nectar, a pot of green tea, breath mints, and Chapstick.
The other Kissing School students—sometimes they come from as far away as Vietnam and Nigeria—are sprawled happily on the bare floor, pillows and blankets beneath them.
The class will be seven hours long.
Byrd starts us off with foot rubs.
In order to be a good kisser, she says, you need to learn how to do the foreplay before the kissing.
Foreplay involves rubbing my husband‘s smelly feet, but that is not as bad as when he has to rub mine.
Right before we left the house, I accidentally stepped on a diaper the dog had gotten into, and although I washed, I now wonder how well.
Inhale, Byrd says, and shows us how to draw in air.
Exhale, she says, and then she jabs my husband in the back.
Don‘t focus on the toes so much, she says.
Move on to the calf.
Byrd tells us other things about the art of kissing.
She describes the movement of energy through various chakras, the manifestation of emotion in the lips; she describes the importance of embracing all your senses, how to make eye contact as a prelude, how to whisper just the right way.
Many hours go by.
My cell phone rings.
It‘s our babysitter.
Our one-year-old has a high fever.
We must cut the long lesson short.
We rush out.
Later on, at home, I tell my friends what we learned at Kissing School:
We don‘t have time to kiss.
A perfectly typical marriage.
Love in the Western world.
Luckily I‘ve learned of other options for restarting love.
Arthur Aron, a psychologist at Stony Brook University in New York, conducted an experiment that illuminates some of the mechanisms by which people become and stay attracted.
He recruited a group of men and women and put opposite sex pairs in rooms together, instructing each pair to perform a series of tasks, which included telling each other personal details about themselves.
He then asked each couple to stare into each other‘s eyes for two minutes.
After this encounter, Aron found most of the couples, previously strangers to each other, reported feelings of attraction.
In fact, one couple went on to marry.
Fisher says this exercise works wonders for some couples.
Aron and Fisher also suggest doing novel things together, because novelty triggers dopamine in the brain, which can stimulate feelings of attraction.
In other words, if your heart flutters in his presence, you might decide it‘s not because you‘re anxious but because you love him.
Carrying this a step further, Aron and others have found that even if you just jog in place and then meet someone, you‘re more likely to think they‘re attractive.
So first dates that involve a nerve-racking activity, like riding a roller coaster, are more likely to lead to second and third dates.
That‘s a strategy worthy of posting on Match.com.
Play some squash.
And in times of stress—natural disasters, blackouts, predators on the prowl—lock up tight and hold your partner.
In Somerville, Massachusetts, where I live with my husband, our predators are primarily mosquitoes.
That needn‘t stop us from trying to enter the windows of each other‘s soul.
When I propose this to Benjamin, he raises an eyebrow.
Why don‘t we just go out for Cambodian food? he says.
Because that‘s not how the experiment happened.
As a scientist, my husband is always up for an experiment.
But our lives are so busy that, in order to do this, we have to make a plan.
We will meet next Wednesday at lunchtime and try the experiment in our car.
On the Tuesday night before our rendezvous, I have to make an unplanned trip to New York.
My husband is more than happy to forget our date.
I, however, am not.
That night, from my hotel room, I call him.
We can do it on the phone. I say.
What am I supposed to stare into? he asks.
The keypad?
There‘s a picture of me hanging in the hall.
Look at that for two minutes.
I‘ll look at a picture I have of you in my wallet.
Come on. he says.
Be a sport, I say. It‘s better than nothing.
Maybe not.
Two minutes seems like a long time to stare at someone‘s picture with a receiver pressed to your ear.
My husband sneezes, and I try to imagine his picture sneezing right along with him, and this makes me laugh.
Another 15 seconds pass, slowly, each second stretched to its limit so I can almost hear time, feel time, its taffy-like texture, the pop it makes when it‘s done.
Pop pop pop.
I stare and stare at my husband‘s picture.
It doesn‘t produce any sense of startling intimacy, and I feel defeated.
Still, I keep on.
I can hear him breathing on the other end.
The photograph before me was taken a year or so ago, cut to fit my wallet, his strawberry blond hair pulled back in a ponytail.
I have never really studied it before.
And I realize that in this picture my husband is not looking straight back at me, but his pale blue eyes are cast sideways, off to the left, looking at something I can‘t see.
I touch his eyes.
I peer close, and then still closer, at his averted face.
Is there something sad in his expression, something sad in the way he gazes off?
I look toward the side of the photo, to find what it is he‘s looking at, and then I see it: a tiny turtle coming toward him.
Risking life and limb, countless expeditions braved Arctic cold and crushing ice in the 1800s.
All failed, but each one came closer and closer to the top of the world.
An iceberg looms over the Panther during an 1869 expedition to Greenland undertaken by the American artist and explorer William Bradford.
The phrase "on top of the world” carries ebullience and enthusiasm, as if nothing could be better than standing at 90° north latitude.
In reality, Earth’s remote North Pole is frigid and barren, an inhospitable region of ice and snow.
Finding this last "undiscovered” place became an obsession for European and American explorers in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Few people lived near the North Pole.
A small Inuit community had settled the closest, but for the most part the region remained isolated from the rest of the world for centuries.
A few intrepid explorers—John Cabot, Martin Frobisher, Henry Hudson, and James Cook—tried to navigate the region in search of the Northwest Passage, a sea route believed to connect the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans in the waters above North America.
The North Pole was not a concern for these early explorers, but their work laid the foundation for a polar obsession to come.
After the Napoleonic Wars ended in 1815, Great Britain, the foremost colonial power of the time, mounted a series of Arctic expeditions to reach the Bering Strait by crossing the Arctic, which was at the time believed to be an open sea surrounded by a belt of ice.
Sir John Ross and Sir William Edward Parry led several expeditions in the 1820s and 30s, but none located the passage itself.
In 1831 a scientific milestone was achieved by James Clark Ross, nephew of John and an officer on his uncle’s Arctic voyage of 1829-1832.
While on a sledge excursion, the young Ross became the first European to locate the planet’s north magnetic pole.
This unimpressive sign marks the 90° north latitude.
The sign itself shifts as the polar caps are dragged along by the powerful marine currents.
AKG/ALBUMThese early voyages revealed how dangerous exploration of northern waters could be but whetted explorers’ appetite for discovery.
Complications often arose from frigid waters trapping ships in newly forming ice.
If a crew could not free their vessel, they often had to wait for months—either for a rescue or for the ice to thaw enough for them to sail away.
In May 1845 another British expedition launched to find the Northwest Passage.
Led by celebrated British explorer and naval officer Sir John Franklin, a crew of 133 sailed the H. M. S. Erebus and H. M. S. Terror into Arctic waters and disappeared without a trace.
Over the next decade more than a hundred European ships went looking for Franklin and his men, searching the labyrinth of islands and inlets that make up the Canadian Arctic.
These rescue missions weren’t successful in finding Franklin (his two ships would not be found until 2014 and 2016), but they did have unexpected results.
While the captain of a naval ship is under strict orders to follow the route stipulated by the ship owner, in the case of a manhunt, the rules are different.
As the objective was to locate the ships and whomever remained alive, the captains enjoyed the freedom to set their own course.
In 1852 Captain Edward Inglefield was in charge of one of the ships involved in the search for the missing explorers, and "We were entering the Polar Sea, and wild thoughts of getting to the Pole rushed rapidly through my brain.”
He didn’t find the lost ships, nor did he reach the pole—the ice in the Smith Sound blocked his way—but Inglefield did say that he had seen clear waters just a short distance north.
Captain Inglefield's ship Isabel sailed in Arctic waters in 1852, as depicted by George Chambers.
British explorer Edward Inglefield captained the Isabel in 1852 into Smith Sound, the channel separating the islands of Greenland and Ellesmere (Canada) which until then had been believed impassable.
By the time the ice forced him to turn around at 78° north latitude, he had pushed farther into the strait than anyone before him.
The search for Franklin’s ships and the North Pole also caught the imaginations of several American explorers.
In the 1850s American financier Henry Grinnell backed two expeditions to locate Franklin’s ships and any potential survivors.
Each expedition faced a relentless battle against cold, exhaustion, and ultimately, ice.
One of their ships made it some 1, 250 miles, but the crew had to abandon the mission and were rescued by a whaling ship.
The Grinnell expeditions had small successes: One of Franklin’s wintering camps was identified on Beechey Island, but searchers found nothing else that revealed Franklin’s fate.
They charted nearly 1, 000 miles of unexplored coastline.
In 1860, aboard the ship United States, Isaac Israel Hayes, a physician and explorer who had served on the second Grinnell mission, set out to reach the North Pole via Baffin Bay and Smith Sound.
Hayes claimed to have traveled far north enough to have seen the open polar sea, but later analysis revealed that his calculations were off.
His book The Open Polar Sea, published in 1867, captured American imaginations and provided details about the harsh conditions faced in the Arctic and the resourcefulness of the Inuit whom he encountered there.
Around this time, German explorers also began seeking the North Pole after prominent geographer August Petermann called for them to get involved in the quest.
Between 1868 and 1870, two German expeditions set out and plotted their routes based on the theories of Petermann.
He argued that the Gulf Stream, an ocean current that carries warm water from the Gulf of Mexico to the North Atlantic, extended into the heart of the Arctic.
He believed the presence of warmer waters in the northern regions could create a navigable breach in the ice.
The team soon learned that the current was not warm enough to create such a breach.
Their missions were unsuccessful.
An 1892 painting depicts how the Austro-Hungarian crew of the Tegetthoff was locked in ice for a year and endured 109 days without sun before landing at an archipelago they named Franz Josef Land in August 1873.
Starting in 1872, Hungarian armed forces.
Their ship, the Tegetthoff, became stranded, frozen in the ice for 27 months.
Unable to sail, the boat drifted among the frozen seas.
The explorers came across an archipelago that they named Franz Josef Land for their emperor.
The team was forced to abandon ship and set out on foot, pulling sledges and lifeboats along with them over the snow and ice.
Pack ice, however, behaves differently from land.
As they moved south, the marine current was pushing the frozen mass on which they were walking north.
In two months of trudging, exhausted, over the ice, they only managed to advance 10 miles.
Fortunately, the expedition did finally make it back to the open sea and reached the Russian coast, where they were rescued by a fisherman.
In England, Franklin’s expedition, the tragic fate of which was eventually discovered in 1859, led to a public ambivalence toward North Pole expeditions, but the British Navy still sought the prize.
In 1875 the British Navy launched an expedition commanded by George Nares.
Two ships, the Alert and Discovery, would sail along the west coast of Greenland via Smith Sound.
The explorers believed that route would lead them to an open polar sea and the North Pole.
The Discovery stopped and set up winter quarters at Lady Franklin Bay off Hall Basin, while the Alert sailed farther north and sheltered in a bay near Ellesmere Island.
To date, it was the farthest point north reached by a European ship.
At this point, Nares began having second thoughts about the expedition.
His observations led him to believe there was no open polar sea.
Despite his misgivings, the mission continued.
After wintering in their respective spots, both crews sent out several sledging parties to explore the terrain in the spring.
It turned out that they were poorly equipped for the brutal Arctic conditions.
They were able to go as far as 83° 20'—the farthest any Western explorer had reached so far.
But it was 450 miles short of their goal.
The team had to turn back because of illness and harsh conditions.
Many were suffering from scurvy, and many died.
The expedition was cut short of its goal, and the two boats ultimately returned to Britain in November 1876.
The British public felt the mission was a disaster for having failed to reach the Pole and resulting in the deaths of so many men.