Martinus Beijerinck, a Dutch botanist who studied tobacco mosaic virus, speculated in 1898 that it was an infectious liquid.
For a time a virus was defined mainly by its size — a thing much smaller than a bacterium but that, like bacteria, could cause disease.
Still later, a virus was thought to be a submicroscopic agent, bearing only a very small genome, that replicated inside living cells — but that was just a first step toward a better understanding.
(See how viruses look up close.)
I shall defend a paradoxical viewpoint, wrote the French microbiologist André Lwoff in The Concept of Virus, an influential essay published in 1957, namely that viruses are viruses.
Not a very helpful definition but fair warning — another way of saying unique unto themselves.
He was just clearing his throat before beginning a complex disquisition.
Lwoff knew that viruses are easier to describe than to define.
Each viral particle consists of a stretch of genetic instructions (written either in DNA or that other information - bearing molecule, RNA) packaged inside a protein capsule (known as a capsid).
The capsid, in some cases, is surrounded by a membranous envelope (like the caramel on a caramel apple), which protects it and helps it catch hold of a cell.
A virus can copy itself only by entering a cell and commandeering the 3D-printing machinery that turns genetic information into proteins.
A Neanderthal skull, one of the most complete yet found, rests near human skeletons in the Musée de l’Homme in Paris.
When modern humans left Africa, they interbred with Neanderthals and instantly acquired genes that had evolved over hundreds of thousands of years.
Scientists have found 152 genes inherited from Neanderthals that help create an immune response.
They have concluded that these genes enabled our ancestors to fight the new viruses they encountered in Europe.
If the host cell is unlucky, many new viral particles are manufactured, they come busting out, and the cell is left as wreckage.
That sort of damage — such as what SARS-CoV-2 causes in the epithelial cells of the human airway — is partly how a virus becomes a pathogen.
But if the host cell is lucky, maybe the virus simply settles into this cozy outpost — either going dormant or back-engineering its little genome into the host’s genome — and bides its time.
This second possibility carries many implications for the mixing of genomes, for evolution, even for our sense of identity as humans, a topic to which I’ll return.
One hint, for now: In a popular 1983 book the British biologist Peter Medawar and his wife, Jean, an editor, asserted, No virus is known to do good: It has been well said that a virus is ‘a piece of bad news wrapped up in protein.’
They had it wrong.
So did a lot of scientists at the time, and it remains a view still embraced, understandably, by anyone whose knowledge of viruses is limited to such bad news as the flu and COVID-19.
But today some viruses are known to do good.
What’s wrapped up in the protein is a genetic dispatch, and that might turn out to be good news or bad, depending.
Where did the first viruses come from?
This requires us to squint back almost four billion years, to the time when life on Earth was just emerging from an inchoate cookery of long molecules, simpler organic compounds, and energy.
Let’s say some of the long molecules (probably RNA) started to replicate.
Darwinian natural selection would have begun there, as those molecules — the first genomes — reproduced, mutated, and evolved.
Groping for competitive edge, some may have found or created protection within membranes and walls, leading to the first cells.
These cells gave rise to offspring by fission, splitting in two.
They split in a broader sense too, diverging to become Bacteria and Archaea, two of the three domains of cellular life.
The third, Eukarya, arose sometime later.
It includes us and all other creatures (animals, plants, fungi, certain microbes) composed of cells with complex internal anatomy.
Those are the three great limbs on the tree of life, as presently drawn.
But where do viruses fit?
Are they a fourth major limb?
Or are they a sort of mistletoe, a parasite wafted in from elsewhere?
Most versions of the tree omit viruses entirely.
Jason Shepherd, a neuroscientist at the University of Utah, holds an image of a three-dimensional reconstruction of a virus-like protein capsule that plays a critical role in cognition and memory.
The ARC gene, which carries the code to create this spherical marvel, was acquired by terrestrial vertebrates from a viral-like ancestor about 400 million years ago.
The capsule, which resembles the capsids that surround viral genomes, ferries genetic in formation between neurons in the human brain as well as in the brains of many other animals.
One school of thought asserts that viruses shouldn’t be included on the tree of life because they aren’t alive.
That’s a lingering argument, hinging on how you define alive.
More intriguing is to grant viruses inclusion within the big tent called Life, and then wonder about how they got in.
There are three leading hypotheses to explain the evolutionary origins of viruses, known to scientists as viruses - first, escape, and reduction.
Viruses - first is the notion that viruses came into existence before cells, somehow assembling themselves directly from that primeval cookery.
The escape hypothesis posits that genes or stretches of genomes leaked out of cells, became encased within protein capsids, and went rogue, finding a new niche as parasites.
The reduction hypothesis suggests that viruses originated when some cells downsized under competitive pressure (it being easier to replicate if you’re small and simple), shedding genes until they were reduced to such minimalism that only by parasitizing cells could they survive.
There is also a fourth variant, known as the chimeric hypothesis, which takes inspiration from anot her category of genetic elements: transposons (sometimes called jumping genes).
The geneticist Barbara McClintock deduced their existence in 1948, a discovery that earned her a Nobel Prize.
These opportunistic elements achieve their Darwinian success simply by bouncing from one part of a genome to another, in rare cases from one cell to another, even one species to another, using cellular resources to get themselves copied, over and over.
Self-copying protects them from accidental extinction.
They accumulate outlandishly.
They constitute, for instance, roughly half of the human genome.
The earliest viruses, according to this idea, may have arisen from such elements by borrowing proteins from cells to wrap their nakedness inside protective capsids, a more complex strategy.
Each of these hypotheses has merits.
But in 2003 new evidence tipped expert opinion toward reduction: the giant virus.
It was found within amoebas, which are single-celled eukaryotes.
These amoebas had been collected in water taken from a cooling tower in Bradford, England.
Inside some of them was this mysterious blob.
It was big enough to be seen through a light microscope (viruses supposedly were too small for that, visible only by electron microscope), and it looked like a bacterium.
Scientists tried to detect bacterial genes within it but found none.
Finally a team of researchers in Marseille, France, invited the thing to infect other amoebas, sequenced its genome, recognized what it was, and named it Mimivirus, because it mimicked bacteria, at least with regard to size.
In diameter it was huge, bigger than the smallest bacteria.
Its genome was also huge for a virus, almost 1.2 million letters long, compared to, say, 13, 000 for an influenza virus, or even 194, 000 for smallpox.
(DNA, like RNA, is a long molecule built with four different molecular bases, which scientists abbreviate by their first letters.)
It was an impossible virus: viral in nature but too big in scale, like a newly discovered Amazon butterfly with a four-foot wingspan.
Jean-Michel Claverie was a senior member of that Marseille team.
The discovery of Mimivirus, Claverie told me, Caused a lot of trouble.
Why?
Because sequencing the genome revealed four very unexpected genes — genes for coding enzymes presumed to be uniquely cellular and never before seen in a virus.
Those enzymes, Claverie explained, are among the components that translate the genetic code to assemble amino acids into proteins.
So, the question was, Claverie said, what the hell has a virus the need for those fancy enzymes, normally active in cells, when he has the cell at his disposal, OK?
What need indeed?
The logical inference is that Mimivirus has them as holdovers because its lineage originated by genomic reduction from a cell.
Mimivirus was no fluke.
Similar giant viruses were soon detected in the Sargasso Sea, and the early name became a genus, Mimivirus, containing several giants.
Then the Marseille team discovered two more behemoths — again, both parasites of amoebas — one taken from shallow marine sediments off the coast of Chile, the other from a pond in Australia.
Up to twice as big as a Mimivirus, even more anomalous, these were assigned to a separate genus, which Claverie and his colleagues named Pandoravirus, evoking Pandora’s box, as they explained in 2013, because of the surprises expected from their further study.
As far back as 150 million years ago, viruses infected mammals and left genes that led to a dramatic evolutionary advance: the placenta, which allows nutrients and oxygen to reach the fetus and waste and carbon dioxide to pass out.
Humans and other mammals with placentas can move around with their unborn young, making them less vulnerable to predators.
In humans, two genes originating from viruses.
This membrane also may aid in preventing the mother’s immune system from attacking the fetus as a foreign object.
Claverie’s senior co-author on that paper was Chantal Abergel, a virologist and structural biologist (and also his wife).
Of the Pandoraviruses, Abergel told me, with a weary laugh: They were highly challenging.
They are my babies.
She explained how difficult it had been to tell what they were, these creatures — so different from cells, so different from classical viruses, carrying many genes that resembled nothing ever before seen.
All of that makes them fascinating but also mysterious.
For a while she called them NLF: new life - form.
But from observing that they didn’t replicate by fission, she and her colleagues realized they were viruses — the largest and most perplexing ones found so far.
These discoveries suggested to the Marseille group a bold variant of the reduction hypothesis.
Maybe viruses did originate by reducing from ancient cells, but cells of a sort no longer present on Earth.
This kind of ancestral protocell might have been different from — and in competition with — the universal common ancestor of all cells known today.
Maybe these protocells lost that competition and were excluded from all the niches available for free - living things.
They may have survived as parasites on other cells, downsized their genomes, and become what we call viruses.
From that vanished cellular realm, maybe only viruses remain, like the giant stone heads on Easter Island.
Discovery of the giant viruses inspired other scientists, notably Patrick Forterre at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, to formulate novel ideas about what viruses are and what constructive roles they have played, and continue to play, in the evolution and functions of cellular life.
Previous definitions of virus were inadequate, Forterre proposed, because scientists were confusing viral particles — the capsid - enclosed bits of genome, properly known as virions — with the totality of a virus.
That, he argued, was as wrong as confusing a seed with a plant, or a spore with a mushroom.
The virion is just the dispersal mechanism, he argued.
The real wholeness of the virus also includes its presence within a cell, once it has seized the cell’s machinery to replicate more virions, more seeds of itself.
To see the two phases together is to see that the cell has effectively become part of the virus’s life history.
Forterre bolstered that notion by inventing a new name for the combined entity: the virocell.
This idea also cut through the alive-or-not-alive conundrum.
A virus is alive when it’s a virocell, according to Forterre, never mind that its virions are inanimate.
The idea behind the virocell concept, he told me by Skype from Paris, was mainly to focus on this intracellular stage.
That’s the delicate stage when the infected cell, like a zombie, is obeying the viral mandate, reading the viral genome and replicating it, but not always without skips, staggers, and mistakes.
Consciousness is a strange beast.
Most of the time you are either awake or asleep, yet these are far from the only statues our minds can enter.
Over the next 10 pages we explore some of these journeys of the mind, from hypnosis to sleep paralysis.
Some of them may seem scary and exotic, but most of us experience at least one at some point in our lives.
All reveal the malleability of the human mind and the fragility of that sense of me, here, now.
Enjoy the trip.
You think you're awake, yet part of your brain is sleeping.
It could be happening to you right now, says Laura Spinney.
Earlier this year, a puzzling report appeared in the journal Sleep Medicine.
It described two Italian people who never truly slept.
They might lie down and close their eyes, but read-outs of brain activity showed none of the normal patterns associated with sleep.
Their behaviour was pretty odd, too.
Though largely unaware of their surroundings during these rest periods, they would walk around, yell, tremble violently and their hearts would race.
The remainder of the time they were conscious and aware but prone to powerful, dream-like hallucinations.
Both had been diagnosed with a neurodegenerative disorder called multiple system atrophy.
According to the report's authors, Roberto Vetrugno and colleagues from the University of Bologna, Italy, the disease had damaged the pair's brains to such an extent that they had entered status dissociatus, a kind of twilight zone in which the boundaries between sleep wakefulness completely break down.
That this can happen contradicts the way we usually think about sleep, but it came as no surprise to Mark Mahowald, medical director of the Minnesota Regional Sleep Disorders Center in Minneapolis, who has long contested the dogma that sleep and wakefulness are discrete and distinct states.
There is now overwhelming evidence that the primary states of being are not mutually exclusive, he says.
The blurring of sleep and wakefulness is very clear in status dissociatus, but he believes it can happen to us all.
If he is right, we will have to rethink our understanding of what sleep is and what it is for.
Maybe wakefulness is not the all-or-nothing phenomenon we thought it was either.
Received wisdom has it that at any given time, healthy people are in one of three states of vigilance: awake, in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep or in non-REM (NREM) sleep.
Each state is distinct and can be recognised by characteristic pattern of brain activity, as measured by an electroencephalogram (EEG).
Wakefulness is easy to detect.
Apart from the fact that a person's eyes are open and they are responsive, their EEG shows a pattern of high-frequency, low-amplitude waves.
NREM sleep is divided into four stages, each of which has its own distinctive EEG pattern.
REM is trickier to spot because in EEG terms it closely resembles stage 1 NREM sleep.
So to be sure it really is REM, researches also look for the telltale rapid eye movements and a slackening in the muscles of the chin and jaw.
Mahowald is not the only person to have questioned these neat distinctions.
David Dinges, a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, has probably deprived more people of sleep in the name of science than anyone else.
In one such study in the late 1980s, Dinges and his team revealed how easily the different states of vigilance can become intermingled.
When volunteers were subjected to tests of working memory in which they had to subtract numbers, they could do an average of 90 sums in 3 minutes with few errors.
After 52 hours deprived of sleep, their performance fell to around 70 subtractions, with not many more errors.
However, after they had slept for 2 hours the change was dramatic.
When we woke them up abruptly, and they rated themselves as alert and ready to go, they couln't do even one subtraction, says Dinges.
People even seemed to be dreaming as they attempted the task.
One subject mused: What if people ran faster than normal people run home, in the middle of a string of incorrect responses.
Known as sleep inertia, a less extreme version of such disorientation is now generally recognised as the cause of the grogginess some people get after their alarm clock goes off.
It is as if they are socially awake but functionally asleep, as if the brain circuits underlying responsiveness are up and and running, but those mediating working memory are still offline.
Mahowald is convinced that it is just one of many disorders that can be explained as a breakdown in the boundaries between sleep and wakefulness.
He lits a whole raft of such conditions in the same issue of Sleep Medicine as Vetrugnos description of people with status dissociatus (vol. 10, p. 159).
One is REM behavioural disorder (RBD), in which people in REM sleep act out their dreams because the temporary paralsis, or cataplexy, that normally accompanies this state is replaced by the full mobility of wakefulness.
In sleep paralysis the opposite is true.
Here, cataplexy intrudes into wakefulness, and a person wakes to find him or herself unable to move.
It is estimated that up to 40 percent of people have experienced this disturbing phenomenon.
Also suprisingly common are hypnagogic hallucinations – sensory illusions that occur on the cusp of sleep when the dreaming component of REM intrudes into wkefulness.
Mahowald's list also includes sleepwalking, night terrors and narcolepsy, which is an inherent instability in vigilance state boundaries characterised by rapid cycling between states and the tendency to fall asleep mid-sentence.
Controversially, the list also includes near-death experiences and alien abductions.
It is no coincidence, he says, that alien abductions almost always occur in the recumbent position, in the transition from wakefulness to sleep.
Sleep is a highly complex phenomenon in which changes in sensory, muscular, hormonal and neural systems must be coordinated to create a particular state of vigilance.
When you think about it, there are billions of pepole in the world who are shifting between wakefulness, REM and non-REM multiple times every 24 hours, says Mahowald.
It's amazing that the switching is as accurate as it is.
This accuracy suggests that there is a strong adaptive drive to be fully in one state or another.
But he also thinks that state dissociation – the presence of more than one vigilance state concurrently – is more common than anyone previously suspected.
The boundaries between sleep and wakefulness are particularly blurred when we are sleep-deprived.
Around a decate ago, Dinges realised that althought his sleep- deprived volunteers seemed to be awake, they were in fact experiencing momentary lapses, or microsleeps.
Since then, he has discovered that these fleeting naps last between half a second and 2 secons, and become increasingly frequent the longer we are deprived of sleep, until finally we cannot recover and nod off.
Dinges sees them as the outward sign of a tug-of-war between neural systems that are trying to initiate sleep, and others that are trying to maintain wakefulness.
This chimes with the ideas of James Krueger of Washington State University in Pullman, who has argued that the individual processing units in the brain – known as cortical columns – fall asleep independently when they become tired.
In his view, shifts between wakefulness and sleep occur when enough columns are in one state or the other (Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol 9, p 910).
Krueger believes this mosaic pattern of sleep explains sleep inertia and sleepwaling.
Some people are more prone to microsleeps than others.
In a 2007 study, Dinges and his colleagues showed that there are enormous differences in people's ability to resist the lure of sleep when tired.
Among a group of healthy, non. sleep- deprived adults, the differences in alertness are small.
But as soon as we provoke the system with some sleep deprivation, those differences get larger and larger, he says (Journal of Sleep Research, vol16, p 170).
This has implications for all of us, especially those in professions where staying awake is a life-or-death matter (see ground control to Major Tom).
If you're doing 100 kilometers per hour on a highway and you have a lapse, your fingers go lax on the steering wheel and you drift off the road at a 4 – degree angle, says Dinges.
Two seconds is all it takes to be completely out of your lane.
Up to 20 percent of traffic accidents are fatigue-related.
Brain imaging has recently revealed a mental back-up system in people who remain alert when sleep-deprived (Journal of Neuroscience, vol 29, p 7948).
While other people have reducted brain activity when tired, sleep-resistant individuals manage to maintain their brain activity levels.
More interestingly, they also recruit new areas to help compensate for having been awake for so long.
These people were selected for the study because they had a gene variant found in around 40 percent of people that is thought to be associated with resistance to sleep deprivation.
It seems likely that such people are also less prone to state dissociation, although this has not yet been tested.
Another group who appear to be more vigilant than most are people who suffer from primary insomnia – insomnia not associated with any other condition.
There is evidence to suggest they are in a constant state of hyperarousal, with relatively high metabolic rates and high levels of the stress hormone cortisol.
It's as though somebody just cranked up their alertness over 24 hours, so they are more alert at night, but they are also more alert in the day, says Mahowald.
As the blur between sleep and wakefulness becomes more widely accepted, researchers are devising techniques for capturing the brain's fleeting lapses and vacillations.
For example, neuroscientist Giulio Tononi of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, is eavesdropping on sleeping brains using EEGs with 256 electrodes rather than the more usual 32, to improve spatial resolution and help him catch the brain in the act of mosaic napping.
Microsleeps are just the tip of the iceberg, Tononi says.
He is particularly concerned by the possiblity that parts of our brain might be going offline without us even realising it.
In many respects, it would be like having a temporary mental disorder without anybody, including yourself, being aware of it, he says.
Forgetfulness and daydreaming could be examples of this, but so could more bizzare and even criminal behaviours (See When a crime is not a crime, page 32).
Meanwhile, Pierre Maquet at the University of Liège, in Belgium has started to use fMRI to chart the patterns of brain activity associated with different sleep states.
His team is already finding that the distinctions between sleep and wakefulness look quite different when you compare patterns of activity across the whole brain, including deep structures, as opposed to using EEG, which measures activity in just the outer few millimetres of the cortex.
Lurking in the background is the hope that these approaches will shed light on the vexed issue of what sleep is for.
A leading theory is that it is important for memory consolitadion.
Yet one of the puzzling aspects of the two Italians with status dissociatus is that, despite complete disruption of both their REM and NREM sleep, they showed no memory deficit.
Does this add grist to the mill of those who beileve that sleep has no other purpose than to save energy and keep us safe (New Scientist, 15 March 2008, p 30)?
Or does it mean, as Mahowald believes, that the two individuals were in fact experiencing some sort of mosaic sleep?