
There was indeed a seed lying in the palm of his hand, but it was shaped exactly like a long, sharply-pointed thorn.
Much-Afraid had often noticed that the Shepherd's hands were scarred and wounded, but now she saw that the scar in palm of the hand held out to her was the exact shape and size of the seed of Love lying beside it.
The seed looks very sharp, she said shrinkingly.
Won't it hurt if you put it into my heart?
He answered gently, It is so sharp that it slips in very quickly.
But, Much-Afraid, I have already warned you that Love and Pain go together, for a time at least.
If you would Much-Afraid looked at the thorn and shrank from it.
Then she looked at the Shepherd's face and repeated his words to herself.
When the seed of Love in your heart is ready to bloom, you will be loved in return, ä and a strange new courage entered into her.
She suddenly stepped forward, bared her heart, and said, Please plant the seed here in my heart.
His face lit up with a glad smile and he said with a note of joy in his voice, Now you will be able to go with me to the High Places and be a citizen in the Kingdom of my Father.
Then he pressed the thorn into her heart.
It was true, just as he had said, it did cause a piercing pain, but it slipped in quickly and then, suddenly, a sweetness she had never felt or imagined before tingled through her.
It was bittersweet, but the sweetness was the stronger.
She thought of the Shepherd's words, It is so happy to love, and her pale, sallow cheeks suddenly glowed pink and her eyes shone.
For a moment Much-Afraid did not look afraid at all.
The twisted mouth had relaxed into a happy curve, and the shining eyes and pink cheeks made her almost beautiful.
Thank you, thank you, she cried, and knelt at the Shepherd's feet.
How good you are.
How patient you are.
There is no one in the whole world as good and kind as you.
I will go with you to the mountains.
I will trust you to make my feet like hinds' feet, and to set me, even me, upon the High Places.
I am more glad even than you, said the Shepherd, and now you really act as though you are going to change your name already.
But there is one thing more I must tell you.
I shall take you to the foot of the mountains myself, so that there will be no danger from your enemies.
After that, two special companions I have chosen will guide and help you on all the steep and difficult places while your feet are still lame and while you can only limp and go slowly.
You will not see me all the time, Much-Afraid, for as I told you, I shall be leaping on the mountains and skipping on the hills, and you will not at first be able to accompany me or keep up with me.
That will come later.
However, you must remember that as soon as you reach the slopes of the mountains there is a wonderful system of communication from end to end of the Kingdom of Love, and I shall be able to hear you whenever you speak to me.
Whenever you call for help I promise to come to you at once.
At the foot of the mountains my two servants whom I have chosen to be your guides will be waiting for you.
Remember, I have chosen them myself, with great care, as the two who are most able to help you and assist you in developing hinds' feet.
You will accept them with joy and allow them to be your helpers, will you not?
Oh, yes, she answered at once, smiling at him happily.
Of course I am quite certain that you know best and that whatever you choose is right.
Then she added joyfully, I feel as though I shall never be afraid again.
He looked very kindly at the little shepherdess who had just received the seed of Love into her heart and was preparing to go with him to the High Places, but also with full understanding.
He knew her through and through, in all the intricate labyrinth of her lonely heart, better far than she knew herself.
No one understood better than he, that growing into the likeness of a new name is a long process, but he did not say this.
He looked with a certain tender pity and compassion at the glowing cheeks and shining eyes which had so suddenly transformed the appearance of plain little Much-Afraid.
Then he said, Now you may go home and make your preparations for leaving.
You are not to take anything with you, only leave everything in order.
Do not tell anyone about it, for a journey to the High Places needs to be a secret matter.
I cannot now give you the exact time when we are to start for the mountains, but it will be soon, and you must be ready to follow me whenever I come to the cottage and call.
I will give you a secret sign.
I shall sing one of the Shepherd's songs as I pass the cottage, and it will contain a special message for you.
When you hear it, come at once and follow me to the trysting place.
Then, as the sun had already gone down in a blaze of red and gold, and the lengthening, he turned and led his flock away toward the sheepfolds.
Much-Afraid turned her face homeward, her heart full of happiness and excitement, and still feeling as though she would never be frightened again.
As she started back across the fields she sang to herself one of the songs from an old book of songs which the Shepherds often used.
Never before had it seemed to her so sweet, so applicable.
There in thy presence, O my King, To feast and hear thy voice.
Look not upon me with contempt, Though soiled and marred I be, The King found me—an outcast thing— And set his love on me.
I shall be perfected by Love, Made fair as day to see.
(CANT.1:1-6)
She walked singing across the first field and was halfway over the next when suddenly she saw Craven Fear himself coming toward her.
Poor Much-Afraid; for a little while she had completely forgotten the existence of her dreadful relatives, and now here was the most dreaded and detested of them all slouching toward her.
Her heart filled with a terrible panic.
She looked right and left, but there was no hiding place anywhere, and besides it was all too obvious that he was actually coming to meet her, for as soon as he saw her he quickened his pace and in a moment or two was right beside her.
With a horror that sickened her very heart she heard him say, Well, here you are at last, little Cousin Much-Afraid.
She shrank away from him and shook with terror and loathing.
Unfortunately this was the worst thing she could have done, for it was always her obvious fear which would have tired of teasing and of her company and would have wondered off to look for other prey.
In all her life, however, Much-Afraid had never been able to ignore Fear.
Now it was absolutely beyond her power to conceal the dread which she felt.
Her white face and terrified eyes immediately had the effect of stimulating Craven's desire to bait her.
Here she was, alone and completely in his power.
He caught hold of her, and poor Much-Afraid uttered one frenzied cry of terror and pain.

At that moment Craven Fear loosed his grasp and cringed away.
The Shepherd had approached them unperceived and was standing beside in his strong, uplifted hand was more than enough for the bully.
Craven Fear slunk away like a whipped cur, actually running from the village instead of toward it, not knowing where he was going, urged by one instinct alone, to find a place of safety.
Much-Afraid burst into tears.
Of course she ought to have known that Craven was a coward and that if only she had lifted her voice and called for the Shepherd, he would have fled at once.
Now her dress was torn and disordered, and her arms bruised by the bully's grip, yet that was the least part of her distress.
She was overwhelmed with shame that she had so quickly acted like her old name and nature, which she had hoped was beginning to be changed already.
It seemed so impossible to ignore the Fearings, still less to resist them.
She did not dare look at the Shepherd, but had she done so she would have seen with what compassion he was regarding her.
She did not realize that the Prince of Love is of very tender compassions to them that are afraid.
She supposed that, like everybody else, he was despising her for her silly fears, so she muttered a shamed thank you.”
Then, still without looking at him, she limped painfully toward the village, weeping bitterly as she went and saying over and over again to herself, What is the use of even thinking of going to the High Places?
I could never reach them, for the least little thing is enough to turn me back.
However, when at last she reached the security of the cottage she began to feel better, and by the time she had drunk a cup of tea and taken her evening meal she had recovered so far that she was able to remind herself of all that had happened there beside the cascade and the pool.
Suddenly she remembered, with a thrill of wonder and delight, that the seed of Love had been planted in her heart.
As she thought of it, the same almost intolerable sweetness stole over her, the bittersweet, indefinable but wholly delightful ecstasy of a new happiness.
It is happy to love, said little Much-Afraid to herself and then she repeated: It is happy to love.
After putting the cottage in order for the night, because she was utterly tired out with all the conflicting emotions of that strange day, she went to bed.
Lying there before falling asleep, she sang over and over again to herself another of the lovely songs from the old song book.
O thou whom my soul loveth, Tell me where thou dost feed, And where thy flocks at noonday To rest and browse dost lead.
For why should I By other be, And not by thee?
O fairest among women, Dost thou indeed not know?
Then lead my little flocket The way that my flocks go; And be to me, As I to thee Sweet company.
Then she fell into a heavy, dreamless sleep.
Function is, essentially, purpose.
When we use the word function we are saying that something has a purpose.
So when we apply that term to training f or sports we are talking about purposeful training for sports.
The idea of functional training or functional exercise actually originated in the sports medicine world.
As is often the case, the thoughts and exercises used in rehab found their way from the physical therapy clinic and athletic training room into the weight room.
The most basic thought was that the exercises used to return an athlete to health might also be the best exercises to maintain and improve health.
Since the concept of functional training was first applied to sports it has been misunderstood and mislabeled by many athletes and coaches.
Terms such as sport specific, which implies that certain movements and movement patterns are specific to individual sports, have been used to describe some functional training concepts.
But sport-specific training takes place with the athlete on the mat, field, or court, whereas in strength and conditioning we work to get the athlete stronger and to improve specific conditioning.
Indeed, functional training may be more accurately represented by the term sports-general training than by the term sport-specific training.
Although we may deal with the smaller details of sport -specific adaptations in this book, it is important to understand that most sports possess far more similarities than differences.
The sports-general school of thought views sports as being far more similar than different.
Actions such as sprinting, striking, jumping, and moving laterally are general skills that apply to a broad range of sports.
A sports generalist believes that speed training for all sports is similar.
Fast is fast regard-less of whether we are training American football players or soccer players.
Core training is no different for golf than it is for hockey or tennis.
In fact, speed training and core training vary very little from sport to sport.
In functional training we look at the commonalities of sport and reinforce them.
At Mike Boyle Strength and Conditioning (MBSC) we have used remarkably similar programs to train Olympic gold medalists in judo and in ice hockey.
In fact, if you viewed our programs, the first thing that would strike you is that no matter how different the athletes may appear the program remains similar.
To better understand the concept of functional training, ask yourself a few simple questions.
How many sports are played sitting down?
As far as I can tell, only a few sports, such as rowing, are performed from a seated position.
If we accept this premise, we can see that training muscles from a seated position would not be functional for most sports.
How many sports are played in a rigid environment where stability is pro-vided by outside sources?
The answer would appear to be none.
Most sports are contested on fields or courts.
The stability is provided by the athlete, not by some outside source.
Reasoning again would tell us that most machine-based training systems are not by definition functional because the load is stabilized for the lifter by the machine.
Proponents of machine-based training systems might argue that machine-based training is safer, but there is a clear trade-off for relative safety in the weight room.
Although in theory machine-based training may result in fewer injuries during training, the lack of proprioceptive input (internal sensory feedback about position and movement) and the lack of stabilization will more than likely lead to a greater number of injuries during competition.
How many sports skills are performed by one joint acting in isolation?
Again, the answer is zero.
Functional training attempts to focus on multijoint movement as much as possible.
Vern Gambetta and Gary Gray, two widely recognized experts on functional training, state, Single joint movements that isolate a specific muscle are very non functional.
Multi-joint movements which integrate muscle groups into movement patterns are very functional (2002, paragraph 13).
From the answers to those three questions we could probably agree that functional training is best characterized by exercises done with the feet in contact with the ground and, with few exceptions, without the aid of machines.
Resistance to the concept of functional training often lies in the idea that we have always done it this way.
But, as Lee Cockrell appropriately asked in his book Creating Magic, What if the way we have always done it was wrong?
In its most basic application, a functional training program prepares an athlete to play his sport.
Functional training is not about using one sport to train an athlete for another sport.
That’s cross-training.
Many collegiate strength programs confuse the two and, as a result, train their athletes to be powerlifters and Olympic-style weightlifters as much as they do to excel in their primary sports.
Functional training on the other hand uses many concepts developed by sport coaches to train speed, strength, and power in order to improve sport performance and reduce incidence of injury.
The key in taking those concepts from the track coach or powerlifting expert is to apply them intelligently to athletes.
They cannot be applied blindly from one sport to another.
Rather, a program should carefully blend concepts and knowledge from areas such as sports medicine, physical therapy, and sports performance to create the best possible scenario for that particular athlete.
Functional training teaches athletes how to handle their own body weight and, in that sense, somewhat resembles the calisthenics so popular in the early 20th century.
The coach initial-ly uses body weight as resistance and strives to employ positions that make sense to the participant.
Functional training intentionally incorporates balance and proprioception (body awareness) into training through the use of unilateral exercises.
Gambetta and Gray (2002, paragraph 8) state, Functional training programs need to introduce controlled amounts of instability so that the athlete must react in order to regain their own stability.
The best and simplest way to introduce instability is to simply ask an athlete to perform an exercise standing on one leg.
By design, functional training utilizes single-leg movements that require balance to properly develop the muscles in the way they are used in sport.
Simply learning to produce force while under a heavy load and on two feet is nonfunctional for most athletes.
Functional training involves simple versions of squatting, forward bending, lunging, push- ing, and pulling.
The purpose is to provide a continuum of exercises that teach athletes to handle their own body weight in all planes of movement.
A final point on this: Functional training programs train movements, not muscles.
There is no emphasis on overdeveloping strength in a particular movement; instead, emphasis is on attaining a balance between pushing and pulling strength and between knee-dominant hip extension (quadriceps and gluteals) and hip-dominant hip extension (hamstrings and glute- als).
Functional training helps train speed, strength, and power in order to improve sport perfor- mance and reduce incidence of injury.
The Science Behind Functional Training
To truly grasp the concept of functional training it is necessary to accept a new paradigm to explain movement.
This new paradigm was first introduced by physical therapist Gary Gray in his Chain Reaction courses in the 1990s.
Gray promoted a new view of muscle function based not on the old definitions of flexion, extension, adduction, and abduction but on operation of kinetic chains and the science of functional anatomy.
In the past, a version of anatomy best described as nonfunctional anatomy taught us how a muscle acted to move an isolated joint.
This could also be called origin-insertion anatomy, and it worked fairly well in describing potential movement of a cadaver on a table or on a skeleton model.
Origin-insertion anatomy required the memorization of where a muscle started (its origin) and ended (its insertion) and its isolated action.
No thought was given to what the muscle did when a person was standing or engaged in locomotion.
In contrast, functional anatomy describes how muscles act to move interrelated groups of joints and muscles working together to perform movements.
In functional anatomical terms, Gray described the actions of the lower extremity during locomotion as follows.
When the foot hits the ground, every muscle from the trunk down has one simple function.
The muscles of the lower body (glutes, quads, hamstrings) all act together to stop the ankle, knee, and hip from bending in order to prevent falling to the ground.
This concept is a difficult one to accept for those who have learned conventional origin-insertion anatomy, but on further review, it makes perfect sense.
In the landing phase of sprinting, is the quadriceps a knee extensor?
No, when the foot hits the ground the quadriceps is actually contracting eccentrically to prevent knee flexion.
Are the hamstrings a knee flexor?
The hamstrings in fact are acting in a dual role to prevent both knee flexion and hip flexion.
As you think this through, the answer becomes more obvious and correspondingly easier to accept.
In the landing phase of walking or running, all the muscles of the lower extremity act in concert to prevent an action, not to cause one.
All the muscles eccentrically (by lengthening) decelerate, or slow down, flexion at the ankle, knee, and hip.
Once you've grasped the preceding concept, the next step comes more simply.
You should now understand that after the athlete has placed the foot on the ground and decelerated flexion, all the lower-extremity muscles again act as a unit to initiate extension at the ankle, knee, and hip.
In fact, the quadriceps is not just extending the knee but assisting with plantar flexion of the ankle and extension of the hip.
When viewed through the functional anatomy lens, all the muscles act eccentrically in the first sequence to stop a movement and then milliseconds later act concentrically to create a movement.
If these concepts begin to make sense, you are on your way to understanding the science of functional anatomy and the concept of functional training.
When an athlete performs a nonfunctional exercise such as a leg extension, she is using a muscle action and nervous system pattern that is never employed when walking or running.
The athlete is by definition performing an open-chain muscle action.
Open-chain means the foot is not in contact with the ground (or a stable platform).
To exercise a muscle as it will be used, you need to close the chain and allow the muscles to work as they would when the foot is on the ground.
In regard to the lower extremity, open-chain or single-joint can be considered almost synonymous with nonfunctional.
The Functional Training Controversy Revisited
Over the past 20 years, there has been a major shift toward attempting to make training more functional.
Coaches changed from a very bilaterally based, barbell-oriented program to a program that places more emphasis on unilateral exercise and incorporates more dumbbell and kettlebell work.
Gary Gray's work was the catalyst for this change.
The shift originated from the physical therapy profession, but the concept of functional training has slowly been adopted by both strength and conditioning coaches and personal trainers.
It might be helpful to view strength training as a continuum, with Gray's multiplane approach on one end and the Westside Barbell powerlifting approach on the other.
The reason behind the explosive growth and rapid acceptance of functional training is simple: It makes sense to coaches and athletes and is verified from their experience in the training room and on the court, track, or field.
One of the first signs that functional training was here to stay was that the large manufacturers of the previously popular single-joint, muscle-isolating strength training machines began to introduce what they called ground-based machines and also began to manufacture basic squat racks and weight benches.
The popularity of machine-based training has steadily declined as even the general public moves toward more functional training concepts.
The popularity of functional training has increased to the point that items such as foam rollers, kettlebells, and resistance bands are now available in sporting goods stores.
Many health clubs have designated areas with AstroTurf and an array of functional tools for clients to practice functional training.
Small-group functional training might be the largest growth area in the fitness world.
However, the initial growth period of functional training was not without controversy and detractors.
This resulted from misperceptions based on lack of information and limited exposure.
So, in some circles, functional training was synonymous with balance exercises and stability balls.
This seemed like common sense and difficult to argue with.
But many coaches viewed functional training as a move away from bilateral lifting and barbells and a move toward athletes and clients lifting light weights on balance boards and balls.
Surprisingly, however, some coaches who have embraced functional training espouse concepts that, in the initial analysis, appear nonfunctional.
This use of apparently nonfunctional exercises by supposed proponents of functional training caused some confusion in the field.
Exercises that promote the function of joints that require stabilization are different from exercises that promote the function of joints that strive for mobility.
The primary function of certain muscles and muscle groups is stabilization.
Functional training for those muscles involves training them to be better stabilizers, often by performing simple exercises through small ranges of motion.
In many cases, in the effort to make everything functional, coaches and athletes ended up neglecting the important stabilizing functions of certain muscle groups.
For some athletes the development of stability at the hip may initially require isolated hip work to properly turn on, or activate, the muscles.
Performance expert Mark Verstegen of EXOS (formerly Athletes' Performance) in Phoenix, Arizona, refers to this concept as isolation for innervation.
At certain times, certain muscle groups—notably the deep abdominals, hip abductors, and scapular stabilizers— need to be isolated to improve their function.
For this reason, some apparently nonfunctional single-joint exercises may in fact improve function of the entire lower extremity.
This is one of the paradoxes of functional training.
Function at the shoulder joint is enhanced by improving the function of the scapular stabilizers and rotator cuff.
Although many athletes perform exercises for the rotator cuff, few exercise scapular stabilizers.
But performing sports skills without strong scapular stabilizers is like trying to shoot a cannon from a canoe.
At our training facility, most athletes have both inadequate rotator cuff strength and insufficient strength or control of the scapular stabilizers.
As a result, we frequently employ exercises to work on the scapular stabilizers and rotator cuff that might appear nonfunctional, but the development of these areas is critical for long- term health of the shoulder joint.
Physical therapists are again leading the way in developing the stabilizers of the lower back.
Improving abdominal strength to aid in the stabilization of the lower back is far from a new concept, but the specific methods are changing rapidly.
The key to developing a truly functional training program is not to go too far in any particular direction.
The majority of exercises should be done standing and should be multijoint, but at the same time, attention should be paid to development of the key stabilizer groups in the hips, core, and posterior shoulder.
A second functional paradox revolves around multiplanar activity done in a sport-specific position.
Advocates of this style of functional training espouse loaded exercises (i. e. , done with a dumbbell or weight vest) in a flexed posture and using foot positions that some strength and conditioning coaches would consider less than desirable.
Although athletes find themselves in compromised positions in competitive situations, coaches need to evaluate how far they are willing to go in loading athletes in positions of spinal flexion.
As an example, although a baseball player often squats down to field a ground ball with a flexed spine, weighted squatting movements with the spine in a flexed position may not be wise.
At what point do you cross the line from safe training into unsafe training?
Our position on this is simple.
When training for strength, never compromise back safety to make the body position of the exercise more specific.
As you begin to explore the concept of functional training for sport, keep an open mind about how and why athletes move in your sport.
Think of your training as a vehicle to improve performance, not just to improve strength.
Many athletes have neglected strength training because they do not fully understand the performance-enhancing value of strength in sports such as baseball, tennis, or soccer.
The key from the athlete's standpoint is for the training to make sense.
The key from the coach's standpoint is to make the training make sense to the athlete.
A training Olympic gold medalist Kayla Harrison is a great example of how sports-general training can benefit an athlete.
In Kayla's program we did not need to imitate the throws of judo; we simply needed to get her stronger in basic movement patterns.
The important thing for Kayla was to develop strength in pushing, pulling, rotating, squatting, and lunging.
How we chose to do that was based not on sport but on injury history and sport demands.
Judo demands a high amount of practice time and a lot of high-impact body stress.
We chose brief twice-weekly workouts focusing on the basic push, pull, knee dominant, hip dominant, core theme, to be repeated over and over.
Because judo is a year-round sport, the program was a version of the basic two- day programs you will see in the last chapter.
There was very little attempt to imitate judo and a strong emphasis on the basics of strength and conditioning as we see them.
A typical training day for Kayla consisted of the following: Foam roller Stretching Dynamic warm-up Power: medicine ball drills and plyometric Strength: push (dumbbell bench press), pull (ring row), knee dominant (single-leg squat), and hip dominant (single-leg straight-leg deadlift)Core: done between sets (basic exercises such as plank, side plank, and carries)Conditioning: specific four-minute bouts that match the energy demands of judo, done primarily on a stationary bike to save joint stres.
Program built around actions that do not occur in sport simply does not make sense.
The key is to design programs that truly prepare athletes for their sports.
This can be done only by using exercises that train the muscles the same way they are used in sport—in other words, through functional training.
For the strength and conditioning professional, the number one goal of a strength and conditioning program should be injury reduction.
In professional sports, the success or failure of the strength and conditioning program is measured by player health more than by wins and losses.
NFL football uses a stat called starters games missed, baseball monitors days on the disabled list, and hockey looks at man games lost to injury.
In each case player health seems to correlate with sound strength and conditioning programs and team success.
On the flip side, if coaches employ a system of training that results in few training injuries bull does not reduce competitive injuries, are they doing their job or protecting their job?
The key to every functional program is this: Practice what you preach and keep it simple.
