He commands Khnum, the ram-headed god of creation who models the clay of mankind on his potter's wheel: Go, to fashion her better than all gods; shape for me, this my daughter, whom I have begotten.
Exactly who was the intended audience for such propaganda is still disputed.
It's hard to imagine Hatshepsut needed to shore up her legitimacy with powerful allies like the high priests of Amun or members of the elite such as Senenmut.
Who, then, was she pitching her story to?
The gods?
The future?
National Geographic?
One answer may be found in Hatshepsut's references to the lapwing, a common Nile marsh bird known to ancient Egyptians as rekhyt.
In hieroglyphic texts the word rekhyt is usually translated as the common people.
It occurs frequently in New Kingdom inscriptions, but a few years ago Kenneth Griffin, now at Swansea University in Wales, noticed that Hatshepsut made greater use of the phrase than other 18th-dynasty pharaohs.
Her inscriptions seemed to show a personal association with the rekhyt which at this stage is unrivaled, he says.
Hatshepsut often spoke possessively of my rekhyt and asked for the approval of the rekhyt—as if the unusual ruler were a closet populist.
When Hatshepsut's heart flutters this way and that as she wonders what the people will say, the people she may have had in mind were the ones as common as lapwings on the Nile, the rekhyt.
After her death, around 1458 B. C., her stepson went on to secure his destiny as one of the great pharaohs in Egyptian history.
Thutmose III was a monument maker like his stepmother but also a warrior without peer, the so-called Napoleon of ancient Egypt.
In a 19-year span he led 17 military campaigns in the Levant, including a victory against the Canaanites at Megiddo in present-day Israel that is still taught in military academies.
He had a flock of wives, one of whom bore his successor, Amenhotep II.
Thutmose III also found time to introduce the chicken to the Egyptian dinner table.
In the latter part of his life, when other men might be content to reminisce about bygone adventures, Thutmose III appears to have taken up another pastime.
He decided to methodically wipe his stepmother, the king, out of history.
When Zahi Hawass set out to find Her Majesty King Hatshepsut, he was fairly certain of one thing: The naked mummy found resting on the floor of a minor tomb was not her.
When I started searching for Hatshepsut, I never thought I would discover that she was this mummy, Hawass says.
For starters, she had no apparent regal bearing; she was fat, and as Hawass wrote in an article published in the journal KMT, she had huge pendulous breasts of the sort more likely to be found on Hatshepsut's wet nurse.
Months earlier Hawass had visited Hatshepsut's tomb, KV20, to search for clues to her whereabouts.
Wearing his trademark fedora, Hawass lowered himself 700 feet into one of the most dangerous tombs in the Valley of the Kings.
The tunnel through friable shale and limestone reeked of bat droppings.
When Howard Carter cleared it in 1903, he called it one of the most irksome pieces of work I ever supervised.
In the tomb Carter found two sarcophagi bearing Hatshepsut's name, some limestone wall panels, and a canopic chest, but no mummy.
Carter made another discovery in a tomb close by—tomb KV60, a minor structure whose entrance was cut into the corridor entrance of KV19.
In KV60 Carter found two much denuded mummies of women and some mummified geese.
One mummy was in a coffin, the other on the floor.
Carter took the geese and closed the tomb.
Three years later another archaeologist removed the mummy in the coffin to the Egyptian Museum.
The inscription on the coffin was later linked to Hatshepsut's nurse.
The mummy on the floor was left as she was, as she had been since being stashed there, probably by priests during the reburials of the 21st dynasty, around 1000 B. C. Over the years Egyptologists lost track of the entrance to KV60, and the mummy on the tomb floor effectively disappeared.
That changed in June 1989, when Donald Ryan, an Egyptologist and lecturer at Pacific Lutheran University in Tacoma, Washington, came to explore several small, undecorated tombs in the valley.
Prompted by the influential Egyptologist Elizabeth Thomas, who suspected that KV60 might house Hatshepsut's mummy, Ryan had included it on his application for a research permit.
Arriving too late his first day to start work, Ryan decided to stroll around the site to drop off some tools.
He wandered over to the entrance of KV19 and for the heck of it, thinking KV60 might be nearby, started sweeping the entranceway with his broom.
He worked backward from the door of KV19.
Within half an hour he'd found a crack in the rock corridor.
A stone hatch revealed a set of stairs.
A week later, with Beethoven's Pathétique Sonata playing on a tape deck, he and a local antiquities inspector entered the lost tomb.
It was spooky, he recalls.
I had never found a mummy before.
The inspector and I walked in very carefully.
There was a woman lying on the floor.
Oh my gosh!
The mummy was lying in a tomb that had been trashed in ancient times by robbers.
Her left arm was crooked across her chest in a burial pose some believe to be common to 18th- dynasty Egyptian queens.
Ryan set about cataloging what he found.
We found the smashed-up face piece of a coffin and flecks of gold that had been scraped off, he recalls.
We didn't know how much had been moved around by Howard Carter, so we documented it as an intact site.
In a side chamber Ryan found a huge pile of wrappings, a mummified cow's leg, and a stacked pile of victual mummies, wrapped bundles of food laid up for the deceased's long journey through eternity.
The more Ryan studied the mummy, the more he thought she might be someone important.
She was extraordinarily well mummified, he says.
And she was striking a royal pose.
I thought, Why, she's a queen!
Could it be Hatshepsut?
Possibly.
But there was nothing to link the mummy to any specific individual.
Still, it didn't seem right to leave whoever she was lying naked on the floor in a mess of rags.
Before he closed the tomb, Ryan and a colleague tidied the burial chamber up a bit.
At a local carpenter's shop they had a simple coffin built.
They lowered the unknown lady into her new bed and closed the lid.
Hatshepsut's prolonged period of anonymity was nearing its end.
Historians long cast Hatshepsut in the role of evil stepmother to the young Thutmose III.
The evidence of her supposed cruelty was the payback she posthumously received when her stepson had her monuments attacked and her kingly name erased from public memorials.
Indeed, Thutmose III did as thorough a job smiting the iconography of King Hatshepsut as he had whacking the Canaanites at Megiddo.
At Karnak her image and cartouche, or name symbol, were chiseled off shrine walls; the texts on her obelisks were covered with stone (which had the unintended effect of keeping them in pristine condition).
At Deir el Bahri, the site of her most spectacular architectural achievement, her statues were smashed and thrown into a pit in front of her mortuary temple.
Known as Djeser Djeseru, holy of holies, on the west bank of the Nile across from modern Luxor, the temple is set against a bay of lion-colored cliffs that frame the tawny temple stones the way the nemes frames a pharaoh's face.
With its three tiers, its porticoes, its spacious ramp-linked terraces, its now vanished sphinx-lined causeway and T-shaped papyrus pools and shade- casting myrrh trees, Djeser Djeseru is among the most glorious temples ever built.
It was designed (perhaps by Senenmut) to be the center of Hatshepsut's cult.
Images of her as queen were left undisturbed, but wherever she had proclaimed herself king, the workers of her stepson followed with their chisels, the vandalism careful and precise.
The destruction was not an emotional decision; it was a political decision, says Zbigniew Szafrański, the director of the Polish archaeological mission to Egypt that has been working at Hatshepsut's mortuary temple since 1961.
By the time excavators cleared the debris from the mostly buried temple in the late 1890s, the mystery of Hatshepsut had been refined: What kind of ruler was she?
The answer seemed self-evident to a number of Egyptologists quick to embrace the idea that Thutmose III had attacked Hatshepsut's memory as revenge for her shameless usurpation of his royal power.
William C. Hayes, the curator of Egyptian art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and a principal at the Deir el Bahri excavations in the 1920s and '30s, wrote in 1953: It was not long … before this vain, ambitious, and unscrupulous woman showed herself in her true colors.
When archaeologists discovered evidence in the 1960s indicating that the banishment of King Hatshepsut had begun at least 20 years after her death, the soap opera of a hotheaded stepson wreaking vengeance on his unscrupulous stepmother fell apart.
A more logical scenario was devised around the possibility that Thutmose III needed to reinforce the legitimacy of his son Amenhotep II's succession in the face of rival claims from other family members.
And Hatshepsut, once disparaged for ruthless ambition, is now admired for her political skill.
Nobody can know what she was like, says Catharine Roehrig, now a curator in the same department once headed by Hayes.
She ruled for 20 years because she was capable of making things work.
I believe she was very canny and that she knew how to play one person off against the next—without murdering them or getting murdered herself.
Close to two decades after Donald Ryan rediscovered the location of KV60, Zahi Hawass asked the curators at the Egyptian Museum to round up all the unidentified and possibly royal female mummies from the 18th dynasty, including the two bodies—one thin, one fat—that had been found in KV60.
The thin mummy was retrieved from storage in the museum's attic; the fat one, KV60a, which had remained in the tomb where it had been found, was transported from the Valley of the Kings.
Over a four-month period in late 2006 and early 2007, the mummies passed through a CT scanner that enabled the archaeologists to examine them in detail and to gauge their age and cause of death.
The CT results from the four candidate mummies were inconclusive.
When the box was run through the scanner, the researchers were astonished to detect a tooth.
The team dentist identified it as a secondary molar with part of its root missing.
When Ashraf Selim, professor of radiology at Cairo University, reexamined the jaw images of the four mummies, there in the right upper jaw of the fat mummy from KV60 was a root with no tooth.
I measured the root in the mummy and the tooth, and we found that they both matched, Selim says.
To be sure, the scientists have proved only that a tooth in a box belongs to a mummy.
The identification is based on the assumption that the contents of the box are properly labeled and were once vital parts of the famous female pharaoh.
And the box inscribed with Hatshepsut's cartouche is not the typical canopic vessel in which mummified organs are found.
It's made of wood, not stone, and might have been used to hold jewelry or oils or small valuables.
Some would say we have not found absolute proof, Selim says.
And I would agree.
The cache of royal mummies contains a tooth that exactly matches a hole in the smile of a mummy found next to the beloved nurse of Egypt's great female pharaoh?
And how marvelous that the tooth was there to connect Hatshepsut's cartouche with a mummy.
If the embalmer hadn't picked it up and put it in with the liver, there is no way we would have known what happened to Hatshepsut, Hawass says.
Already the CT scans have changed history, dispelling theories that Hatshepsut might have been killed by her stepson.
She probably died of an infection caused by an abscessed tooth, with complications from advanced bone cancer and possibly diabetes.
Hawass speculates that the high priests of Amun may have moved her body to the tomb of her nurse to protect it from looters; many royalty of the New Kingdom were hidden in secret tombs for security.
As for the DNA tests, the first round began in April 2007 and has shown nothing definitive.
With ancient specimens you never have a 100 percent match, because the genetic sequences aren't complete, says Angélique Corthals, a professor of biomedicine and forensic studies at Stony Brook University in New York and one of three consultants working with the Egyptians.
We looked at mitochondrial DNA for the suspected Hatshepsut mummy and her grandmother Ahmose Nefertari.
There is about a 30 to 35 percent chance that the two samples are not related, but I cannot emphasize enough that these are just preliminary results.
Another round of tests may soon deliver a clearer verdict.
Last spring photographer Kenneth Garrett asked Wafaa El Saddik, director of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo, to review a list of Hatshepsut treasures he hoped to photograph for this article: a limestone sphinx of Hatshepsut from the ruins of her temple, the wooden box containing the tooth, a limestone bust of Hatshepsut in the guise of the underworld god Osiris.
El Saddik came to the final item on the list: the mummified body of Hatshepsut herself.
You want us to remove the glass? she asked incredulously, as if the mummy, long neglected, now possessed something unspeakably precious.
The photographer nodded.
The director shuddered.
This is the history of the world we're talking about! she exclaimed.
In the end, it was decreed that one of the panels of glass could be removed from the case in the Royal Mummy Room without jeopardizing the history of the world.
Staring at what was left of the great female pharaoh as the lights were being set up, I found myself wondering why it was so important to authenticate her corpse.
On the one hand, what could better animate the astonishing history of ancient Egypt than the actual woman preserved in defiance of nature and the forces of decay?
Here she was now, among us, like an ambassador of antiquity.
On the other hand, what did we want from her?
Wasn't there something oppressively morbid about the curiosity that brought millions of rubberneckers to the Royal Mummy Rooms and made a fetish of the royal dead in the first place?
The longer I stared at Hatshepsut, the more I recoiled from those unfathomable eyes and the suffocating fixity of that lifeless flesh.
Most of us live by the lapwing creed that is the antithesis of the pharaohs' faith: ashes to ashes, dust to dust.
It struck me how much more of Hatshepsut was alive in her texts, where even after so many thousands of years, you can still feel the flutter of her heart.
The great end of life is not knowledge but action.
Two words describe what this book is about: PRODUCING RESULTS!
To me, success is the ongoing process of striving to become more.
The road to success is always under construction, and by applying the technology in this book, I was able to produce astonishing results in a very short period of time.
The power to magically transform our lives into our greatest dreams lies waiting within us all.
It's time to unleash that power!
Power is a very emotional word for many people, and has a negative connotation for some people, but to me, ultimate power is the ability to produce the results you desire most and create value for others in the process.
Real power is shared, not imposed.
It's the ability to define human needs and fulfill them both your needs and the needs of the people you care about.
Although we're in an information age, information is not enough to produce the results we want.
Knowledge is only potential power.
Action is what unites every success.
For me, real power is the ability to act.
The results we get in life is determined by how we communicate to ourselves.
In the modern world, the quality of life is the quality of communication.
What we picture and say to ourselves, how we move and use the muscles of our bodies and our facial expressions will determine how much of what we know we will use.
We all produce two forms of communication from which the experience of our lives is fashioned.
First, we conduct internal communications: those things we picture, say, and feel within ourselves.
The level of success you experience internally - the happiness, joy, ecstasy, love or anything you desire - is the direct result of how you communicate to yourself.
How you feel is not the result of what is happening in your life - it is your interpretation of what is happening.
NOTHING HAS ANY MEANING EXCEPT THE MEANING WE GIVE IT through our internal communication.
Secondly, we experience external communications: words, tonalities, facial expressions, body postures, and physical actions to communicate with the world.
Every communication we make - internal and external - is an action, a cause set in motion, and that cause produces an effect.
You might think of the process of producing emotional states by managing your internal communication as being similar to a director's job.
To produce the precise results (s)he wants, the director of a movie manipulates what you see and hear.
Likewise, if you can learn to manipulate your internal movie, you will be able to create the external results you want in your life.
You're already producing results.
They just may not be the results you desire.
Most of us think of our mental states and most of what goes on in our minds as things that happen outside our control.
But the truth is you can control your mental activities and your behaviors to a degree you never believed possible before.
If you're depressed, you created and produced the scene in the movie you call depression by the way you communicated to yourself internally with your mind and body.
It takes specific actions to produce depression or ecstasy, or any emotional state.
Learning to manipulate these actions will lead you to control of your emotions and your behavior.
You can run your brain as skillfully as Steven Spielberg runs his set.
Each chapter of this book deals with some aspect of how to run your brain.
People who have attained excellence follow a consistent path to success.
I call it the Ultimate Success Formula.
Here are the four steps: THE ULTIMATE SUCCESS FORMULA
1) KNOW YOUR OUTCOME - precisely define what you want
2) TAKE ACTION
3) DEVELOP SENSORY ACUITY TO RECOGNIZE THE KINDS OF RESPONSES YOU'RE GETTINGARE YOU GETTING CLOSER TO YOUR OUTCOME, OR FURTHER AWAY FROM IT?
4) DEVELOP FLEXIBILITY TO CHANGE YOUR APPROACH IF YOU'RE NOT GETTING CLOSER TO YOUR OUTCOME.
Steven Spielberg, John F. Kennedy, Martin Luther King Jr., Ted Turner, Tina Turner, Pete Rose, and Dean Barbara Black of the Columbia University School of Law, are people that applied the Ultimate Success Formula in their lives, and who also shared what I believe are seven fundamental character traits that they have all cultivated within themselves that give them the fire to do whatever it takes to succeed.
7 FUNDAMENTAL CHARACTER TRAITS OF SUCCESS
1) PASSION - gives life power, juice, and meaning.
There is no greatness without a passion to be great - great parent, athlete, scientist, artist, businessperson (see Chapter XI)
2) BELIEF - passion and belief provide the fuel toward excellence (see Chapters IV, V)
3) STRATEGY - a way of organizing resources (Chapters VII, VIII)
4) CLARITY OF VALUES - the fundamental ethical, moral, and practical evaluations we make about what's most important in our lives (Chapter XVIII)
5) ENERGY - people of excellence have all have the energy to take opportunities and shape them (Chapters IX, X)
6) RAPPORT-BONDING POWER - the ability to connect with people at a deepest levels of your heart (Chapter XIII)
7) MASTERY OF COMMUNICATION - the essence of what this book is about.
People who fail take the adversities of life and accept them as limitations; people who succeed have learned to turn those adversities into challenges that teach them strength.
The people who shape our lives and our cultures also have the ability to communicate a vision or a quest or a joy or a mission to others.
Every chapter of this book deals in some way with mastery of internal and external communication.
This book is divided into 3 parts:
Part 1: How to take charge of and run your own brain and body more effectively.
Part 2: Discover what you really want in your life and communicate more effectively with others.
Part 3: Discover what motivates us, what we can contribute on a larger, global scale.
What if there was a way to take action that greatly accelerated the learning process - what if you could learn in minutes what someone took years to perfect?
MODELING! - see Chapter II.
CHAPTER I - KEY POINTS
What we do (our results) in life is determined by how we communicate to ourselves.
In the modern world.
THE QUALITY OF LIFE IS THE QUALITY OF OUR COMMUNICATION.
How you feel is the direct result of how you communicate to yourself - your interpretation of what is happening.
NOTHING HAS ANY MEANING EXCEPT THE MEANING WE GIVE IT.
We produce two forms of communication: 1) Internal communication - how we picture, say, and feel within ourselves 2) External communication - words, tonalities, facial expressions, body postures and physical actions
EVERY COMMUNICATION WE MAKE IS A CAUSE SET IN MOTION, and that cause produces an effect (result). You're already producing results.
But if your result is depression, there are specific ways you are communicating with yourself - e. g. , things you are doing with your body, the tonality with which you talk to yourself, the way you picture your life - it takes effort to produce any result.
Your job is similar to a film director's job - you need to manipulate what (the way you communicate to yourself).
COMMUNICATION IS POWER.
you see and hear We're in an information age, but information is not enough.
ACTION IS WHAT UNITES EVERY GREAT SUCCESS.
Knowledge is only potential power.
POWER IS THE ABILITY TO ACT.
Real power is shared, not imposed.
It's the ability to define human needs and to fulfill them - both your needs and the needs of the people you care about.
CHAPTER I
EXERCISES 1.
When you are producing the result called happiness:
a) What do you picture?
b) What do you say to yourself?
c) What do you feel in your body?
d) Do those things now, and notice how easily you can produce that result by manipulating the way you communicate to yourself.
e) If you can't think of what you see, say, etc., just act as if you can - ask yourself If I were picturing something, what would it be?
or If I were to say something to myself, what would I be saying to myself?  etc.
What beliefs do you have about what you feel passionate about?
How do you communicate to yourself when you feel passionate - what do you picture?
What do you say to yourself?
What do you feel in your body when you feel passionate?
CHAPTER II
What is the difference that makes a difference?
I've been obsessed by that question for my entire life.
People who succeed do not have fewer problems than people who fail.
It is not what happens to us that separates failures from successes.
It is how we perceive what happens and what we do about what happens that makes the difference.
Think of W. Mitchell's two terrible accidents, and contrast it with John Belushi's external success.
W. Mitchell chose to consistently communicate to himself that his experience had occurred for a purpose.
His internal communication formed sets of beliefs and values that continued to direct his life from a sense of advantage rather than tragedy - even after he was burned and paralyzed.
John Belushi had everything externally, but internally, he'd been running on empty for years before he died of drug abuse.
Long ago, I realized that success leaves clues, and that people who produce outstanding results do specific things to create those results.
I believed that if I precisely duplicated the actions of others, I could reproduce the same quality of results that they had.
This is called MODELING - If you precisely reproduce the specific mental and physical actions of another person, you will get the same results - if it's possible for others in the world, it's possible for you.
Richard Bandler and John Grinder, co-founders of NLP (Neuro-Linguistic Programming) found that there are three forms of mental and physical actions that correspond most directly to the quality of results we produce.
In order to model effectively, these fundamental ingredients must be duplicated:
1) Belief system - Whether you believe you can do something or you believe you can't, you're right.
2) Mental Syntax - the way people organize their thoughts.
Mental syntax is like a code - ingredients and order.
3) Physiology - the mind and body are totally linked.
The way you use your physiology - the way you breathe and hold your body, your posture, your facial expressions, the nature and quality of your movements - actually determines what state you're in.
THE STATE YOU'RE IN THEN WILL DETERMINE THE RANGE AND QUALITY OF THE BEHAVIORS YOU'RE ABLE TO PRODUCE.
We're actually modeling all the time.
How does a child learn to speak?
We live in a culture that's consistent enough so that what works in one place will very often work in another.
The world's greatest modelers are the Japanese.
The One-Minute Manager by Ken Blanchard and Spencer Johnson is a model for simple and effective management of any human relationship. It was put together by modeling some of the most effective managers in the country.
Think of this program as a guidebook for conscious modeling with greater precision, a chance for you to become conscious of something you've always been doing in your life.
If someone is doing something outstanding, the immediate question that should pop in your mind is, How does (s)he create that result?
CHAPTER II - KEY POINTS
It's a funny thing about life; if you refuse to accept anything but the best, you very often get it.
W. Somerset Maugham: People who succeed do not have fewer problems than people who fail.
The only people without problems are those in cemeteries.
It's not what happens to us that separates failures from successes.
It is how we perceive it and what we do about what happens that makes the difference.
Things do not change; we change.
Henry David Thoreau: Success leaves clues.
I believe that if I precisely duplicate the actions of others, I can reproduce the same quality of results.
One of the presuppositions of NLP is that we all share the same neurology, so if anyone in the world can do anything, you can, too, if you run your nervous system in the same way - if you're willing to pay the price in time and effort.
The movers and shakers of the world are often professional modelers - the Japanese, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, The One Minute Manager, In Search of Excellence, etc.
Actually, we're modeling all the time: How does a child learn to speak?
Successful businesses in one city will usually produce a success in a similar kind of city before the lag time is up.
Model someone's:
CHAPTER II - MODELING EXERCISES
1. Look around you and find someone who is excellent at some aspect of his/ her life - either personally or professionally.
You don't have to admire all aspects of that person's life - a person might be superior in business judgments, and not much of a marriage partner.
Remember, you're looking for excellent characteristics - no one has exactly the life you'd like to live if you look closely enough.
Once you've found a person with an aspect that you would like to model, begin to ask questions that relate to that person's belief system.
How to duplicate mental syntax and physiology will be dealt with in Chapters VII and IX, respectively.
The foundation of modeling lies in a person's belief systems.
Ask him or her questions about what they believe about their success in the area that you're modeling.
Let's say you admire someone's marriage, for example, and you decide you would like to find out what the husband does that seems to cause his wife to love and respect him so much.
So you begin: Sam, what do you BELIEVE that makes you such a good husband?
Now, Sam may say something like, I don't know - I'm lucky, I guess.
So you'll have to probe further, Well, if you did know what you believed about marriage and your wife that makes you successful in your marriage, WHAT WOULD IT BE?
The question, If you he truly does have, but is not currently conscious of.
You might even have to ask the same question once or twice more if he continues to say I don't know.
But with persistence and genuine curiosity, added to the compliment you're giving him about admiring his marriage, he will eventually come out with a belief like Well, I guess every time I look at my wife I think to myself, 'What a great person she is, ' or I don't know where I'd be without her: she supports every aspect of my life.
I'd do anything for her.
REMEMBER, YOU'RE A BELIEF SYSTEM DETECTIVE.
People don't become successful by chance.
There are powerful beliefs that are the foundation of a person's success.
Discover those beliefs, and I'll show you how to install them in yourself later in the book.
FIND AT LEAST 5 MAJOR BELIEFS THIS PERSON HAS ABOUT THE AREA YOU'RE MODELING.
2. Find another person you would like to model.
Choose someone who is excellent in a different aspect - if you chose a personal context for your first candidate, choose a person whom you admire in a professional context some aspect of his/her excellence.
Model their beliefs.
3. Take the beliefs that seem to really make the difference in these people's lives, write or type them out and put them in a conspicuous place in your house and car, so that you remind yourself of beliefs you would like to have.
Later on, I'll take you further into installing beliefs.
DISCOVERING THE DIFFERENCE THAT MAKES THE DIFFERENCE.
CHAPTER III
The experience of being on a roll, when you could do no wrong - or the opposite - is a result of the neurophysiological state you are in.
Understanding state is the key to understanding change and achieving excellence.
Our behavior is the result of the state we're in.
We always do the best we can with the resources available to us, but sometimes we find ourselves in unresourceful states.
