John, beside himself, pushed through the crowds and managed to catch her attention before she was whisked away by a police escort.
He identified himself as a former pilot in Vietnam and said that he felt responsible for the bombing of her village twenty-four years before.
He says: Kim saw my grief, my pain, my sorrow…
She held out her arms to me and embraced me.
All I could say was "I’m sorry; I’m sorry” – over and over again.
And at the same time she was saying, "It’s all right, I forgive you.”
John says that it was vital for him to meet face to face with Kim, and to tell her that he had agonized for years over her injuries.
Without having had the chance to get that off his chest, he is not sure he could have ever forgiven himself.
As it turned out, of course, he got even more than he hoped for: Kim forgave him.
Reflecting on the way the incident changed his life, John maintains that forgiveness is "neither earned nor even deserved, but a gift."
It is also a mystery.
He still can’t quite grasp how a short conversation could wipe away a twenty-four-year nightmare.
Pat, another Vietnam veteran, is a gentle, quiet man who loves children and horses.
In the seven years since I first met him, however, I have become aware that he has a darker side – one that centers on his inability to forgive himself: Death is on my mind a lot.
The deaths I have caused – and wanting my own death – are with me every day.
I joke around a lot with the people I work with.
I have to, to hide the pain and to keep my mind from thinking.
I need to laugh. Laughing keeps the blues away.
But I cannot love.
Part of my soul is missing, and it seems I won’t ever get it back.
I don’t know if I can ever forgive myself for all of my wrongs.
I live day to day, but I am tired all the time – tired.
Will it ever end?
I don’t see how.
It’s been with me over twenty-five years now.
People like Pat are often urged to receive formal counseling, to join a support group, or to attend group therapy meetings so as to compare notes with others who have had similar experiences.
He has done all of this, and still not found peace.
Perhaps, like John, he wishes he could meet the families of those he killed – an unlikely opportunity – or bring the victims themselves back to life so he could ask their forgiveness – an obviously impossible one.
So what should he do?
A conversation Robert Coles once had with the psychoanalyst Anna Freud may hint at an answer.
Discussing an elderly client with a long and troubled psychological history, Freud suddenly concluded: You know, before we say good-bye to this lady, we should wonder among ourselves not only what to think – we do that all the time! – but what in the world we would want for her.
Oh, I don’t mean psychotherapy; she’s had lots of that.
It would take more years, I suspect, of psychoanalysis than the good Lord has given her…
No, she’s had her fill of "us, ” even if she doesn’t know it…
This poor old lady doesn’t need us at all…
What she needs…is forgiveness.
She needs to make peace with her soul, not talk about her mind.
There must be a God, somewhere, to help her, to hear her, to heal her…and we certainly aren’t the ones who will be of assistance to her in that regard!
All of us yearn for the freedom to live without guilt.
At some level, every one of us longs for forgiveness.
Yet when all is said and done, we cannot acquire it.

Sometimes the person we have wronged is unable or unwilling to forgive us.
Sometimes we are unable or unwilling to forgive ourselves.
Even the best psychoanalysis, the most earnest confession of guilt, may not be enough to assure us of lasting relief or healing.
But the power of forgiveness still exists, and as John Plummer found out, it can work wonders even when we are sure that we have neither earned nor deserved it.
It comes to us as a gift, often when we feel least worthy of receiving it.
Finally, like any gift, it can be accepted or rejected.
What we do with it is up to us.
Every time the happily married woman went away she wondered how it would feel to sleep with another man.
That weekend she was determined to find out.
It was December; she felt a curtain closing on another year.
On Friday evening, she took the train into the city, sat reading in a first-class carriage.
The crime novel didn’t hold her interest; she could already predict the ending.
She had left a dish of macaroni cheese out for the kids, brought her husbandas suits back from the cleaners.
When she reached the city she took a taxi to the hotel.
They gave her a small, white room with a view of Vicar’s Close, one of the oldest streets in England, a row of stone houses with tall, granite chimneys where the clergy lived.
She sat at the hotel bar that night nursing a tequila and lime, but there was nothing doing.
Old men were reading newspapers, business was slow, but she didn’t mind; she needed a good night’s sleep.
She fell into her rented bed, into a dreamless sleep, and woke to the sound of bells ringing in the cathedral.

On Saturday she walked to the shopping centre.
Families were out, pushing buggies through the morning crowd, a thick stream of people flowing through glass automatic doors.

She bought unusual gifts for her children, things she thought they wouldn’t predict.
She bought an electric razor for her eldest son – he was getting to that age – an atlas for the girl, and for her husband an expensive gold watch with a plain, white face.
She dressed up in the afternoon, put on a short plum-coloured dress, high heels, her darkest lipstick, and walked back into town.
A jukebox song, The Ballad of Lucy Jordan, lured her into a pub, a converted prison with barred windows and a low, beamed ceiling.
On the next stool sat a guy in a leather jacket that looked like he should have given it to Oxfam years ago.
Hello, he said.
Haven’t seen you before.
He had a red complexion, a gold chain dangling inside a Hawaiian print shirt, mud-coloured hair.
His glass was almost empty.
What’s that you’re drinking? she said.
There were no rings on his fingers.
I’m the loneliest man in the world, he said.
How about you?
He laughed.
Play pool with me.
I don’t know how.
Doesn’t matter, he said, I’ll teach you.
You’ll be potting that black before you know it.
He put coins into a slot and pulled something and a little landslide of balls knuckled down into a black hole under the table.
Stripes and solids, he said, chalking up the cue.
You’re one or the other.
I’ll break.
He taught her to lean down low and sight the ball, to watch the cue ball when she took the shot, but he didn’t let her win one game.
She leaned her forehead against the cool of the mirror.
She couldn’t remember ever being drunk like this.
They finished off their drinks and went outside.
The air spiked her lungs.
Clouds smashed into each other in the sky.
Let’s walk, he said.
I’ll give you the tour.
She fell into step beside him, listened to his jacket creaking as he led her down a path where the moat curved round the cathedral.
An old man stood outside the Bishop’s Palace selling stale bread for the birds.
They bought some and stood at the water’s edge feeding five cygnets whose feathers were turning white.
Brown ducks flew across the water and landed in a nice skim on the moat.
When a black Labrador came bounding down the path, a huddle of pigeons rose as one and settled magically in the trees.
I feel like Francis of Assisi, she laughed.
Rain began to fall; she felt it falling on her face like small electric shocks.
They backtracked through the market-place where stalls were set up in the shelter of tarpaulin.
They sold everything: smelly second-hand books and china dishes, big red poinsettias, holly wreaths, brass ornaments, fresh fish with dead eyes lying on a bed of ice.
Come home with me, he said.
I’ll cook for you.
You’ll cook for me?
You eat fish?
I eat everything, she said, and he seemed amused.
I know your type, he said.
He chose a trout that looked like it was still alive.
The fishmonger chopped its head off and wrapped it up in foil.
Always, as they passed the stalls, he asked her if she wanted anything.
He was free with his money, kept it crumpled in his pockets like old receipts, didn’t smooth the notes out even when he was handing them over.
On the way home they stopped at the off-licence, bought two bottles of Chianti and a lottery ticket, all of which she insisted on paying for.
Don’t hold your breath, he said, and watched her walk through the door he’d opened for her.
They strolled down cobbled streets, past barber’s where a man was sitting with his head back, being shaved.
The streets grew narrow and winding; they were outside the city lights now.
You live in suburbia? she asked.
He did not answer, kept walking.
She could smell the fish.
When they came to a wrought-iron gate he told her to hang a left.
They passed under an archway and came out in a dead end.
He unlocked a door to a block of flats and followed her upstairs to the top floor.
Keep going, he said when she stopped on the landings.
She giggled and climbed, giggled and climbed again, stopped at the top.
The door needed oil; the hinges creaked when he pushed it back.
The walls of his flat were plain and pale, the sills dusty.
One stained mug sat lonely in the sink.
A white Persian cat jumped off a couch in the living room.
It was neglected, like a place where someone used to live; the rubber plant in the lounge crawled across the carpet towards a rectangular pool of streetlight under a high window.
A big cast-iron tub stood in the bathroom on blue, steel claws.
Some bath, she said.
You want a bath? he said.
Try it out.
Fill her up and dive in.
Go ahead, be my guest.
She filled the tub, kept the water as hot as she could stand it.
He came in and stripped to the waist, and shaved at the handbasin with his back to her.
She closed her eyes and listened to him work the lather, tapping the razor against the sink, shaving.
It was like they’d done it all before.
She thought him the least threatening man she’d ever known.
She held her nose and slid underwater, listened to the blood pumping in her head, the rush and cloud in her brain.
When she surfaced, he was standing there in the steam, wiping traces of shaving foam off his chin, smiling.
Having fun? he said.
When he lathered a flannel, she got up.
Water fell off her shoulders and trickled down her legs.
He began at her feet and work upwards, washing her in strong, slow circles.
She looked good in the yellow shaving light, raised her feet and arms and turned like a child for him.
He made her sink back down into the water and rinsed her off, wrapped her in a towel.
I know what you need, he said.
You need looking after.
There isn’t a woman on the earth who doesn’t need looking after.
Stay there.
He went out and came back with a comb, began combing the knots from her hair.
You’ve blond fuzz, like a peach.
His knuckle slid down the back of her neck, followed her vertebrae.
His bed was brass with a white, goose-down duvet and black pillowcases.
She undid his belt, slid it from the loops.
The buckle jingled when it hit the floor.
She loosened his trousers.
Naked, he wasn’t beautiful, yet there was something voluptuous about him, something unbreakable and sturdy in his build.
His skin was hot.
Pretend you’re America, she said.
I’ll be Columbus.
Under the bedclothes, down between the damp of his thighs, she explored his nakedness.
His body was a novelty.
When her feet became entangled in the sheets, he flung them off.
