And the reason there are still sharks around is that sharks are better at being sharks than anything else is.
Physical books are tough, hard to destroy, bathresistant, solar-operated, feel good in your hand: they are good at being books, and there will always be a place for them.
They belong in libraries, just as libraries have already become places you can go to get access to ebooks, and audiobooks and DVDs and web content.
A library is a place that is a repository of information and gives every citizen equal access to it.
It’s a community space.
It’s a place of safety, a haven from the world.
It’s a place with librarians in it.
What the libraries of the future will be like is something we should be imagining now.
Literacy is more important than ever it was, in this world of text and email, a world of written information.
We need to read and write, we need global citizens who can read comfortably, comprehend what they are reading, understand nuance, and make themselves understood.
Libraries really are the gates to the future.
So it is unfortunate that, round the world, we observe local authorities seizing the opportunity to close libraries as an easy way to save money, without realising that they are stealing from the future to pay for today.
They are closing the gates that should be open.
According to a recent study by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, England is the only country where the oldest age group has higher proficiency in both literacy and numeracy than the youngest group, after other factors, such as gender, socio-economic backgrounds and type of occupations are taken into account”.
Or to put it another way, our children and our grandchildren are less literate and less numerate than we are.
They are less able to navigate the world, to understand it to solve problems.
They can be more easily lied to and misled, will be less able to change the world in which they find themselves, be less employable.
All of these things. And as a country, England will fall behind other developed nations because it will lack a skilled workforce.
Books are the way that we communicate with the dead.
The way that we learn lessons from those who are no longer with us, that humanity has built on itself, progressed, made knowledge incremental rather than something that has to be relearned, over and over.
There are tales that are older than most countries, tales that have long outlasted the cultures and the buildings in which they were first told.
I think we have responsibilities to the future.
Responsibilities and obligations to children, to the adults those children will become, to the world they will find themselves inhabiting.
All of us - as readers, as writers, as citizens - have obligations.
I thought I’d try and spell out some of these obligations here.
I believe we have an obligation to read for pleasure, in private and in public places.
We have an obligation to support libraries.
To use libraries, to encourage others to use libraries, to protest the closure of libraries.
If you do not value libraries then you do not value information or culture or wisdom.
You are silencing the voices of the past and you are damaging the future.
We have an obligation to read aloud to our children.
To do the voices, to make it interesting, and not to stop reading to them just because they learn to read to themselves.
Use reading-aloud time as bonding time, as time when no phones are being checked, when the distractions of the world are put aside.
We have an obligation to use the language.
To push ourselves: to find out what words mean and how to deploy them, to communicate clearly, to say what we mean.
We must not to attempt to freeze language, or to pretend it is a dead thing that must be revered, but we should use it as a living thing, that flows, that borrows words, that allows meanings and pronunciations to change with time.
We writers - and especially writers for children, but all writers - have an obligation to our readers: it’s the obligation to write true things, especially important when we are creating tales of people who do not exist in places that never were - to understand that truth is not in what happens but what it tells us about who we are.
Fiction is the lie that tells the truth, after all.
We have an obligation not to bore our readers, but to make them need to turn the pages.
One of the best cures for a reluctant reader, after all, is a tale they cannot stop themselves from reading.
And while we must tell our readers true things and give them weapons and give them armour and pass on whatever wisdom we have gleaned from our short stay on this green world, we have an obligation not to preach, not to lecture, not to force predigested morals and messages down our readers’ throats like adult birds feeding their babies pre- masticated maggots; and we have an obligation never, ever, under any circumstances, to write anything for children that we would not want to read ourselves.
We have an obligation to understand and to acknowledge that as writers for children we are doing important work, because if we mess it up and write dull books that turn children away from reading and from books, we ‘ve lessened our own future and diminished theirs.
It is easy to pretend that nobody can change anything, that we are in a world in which society is huge and the individual is less than nothing: an atom in a wall, a grain of rice in a rice field.
But the truth is, individuals change their world over and over, individuals make the future, and they do it by imagining that things can be different.
Look around you: I mean it.
Pause, for a moment and look around the room that you are in.
I’m going to point out something so obvious that it tends to be forgotten.
It’s this: that everything you can see, including the walls, was, at some point, imagined.
Someone decided it was easier to sit on a chair than on the ground and imagined the chair.
Someone had to imagine a way that I could talk to you in London right now without us all getting rained on.
This room and the things in it, and all the other things in this building, this city, exist because, over and over and over, people imagined things.
We have an obligation to make things beautiful.
Not to leave the world uglier than we found it, not to empty the oceans, not to leave our problems for the next generation.
We have an obligation to clean up after ourselves, and not leave our children with a world we’ve shortsightedly messed up, shortchanged, and crippled.
We have an obligation to tell our politicians what we want, to vote against politicians of whatever party who do not understand the value of reading in creating worthwhile citizens, who do not want to act to preserve and protect knowledge and encourage literacy.
This is not a matter of party politics.
This is a matter of common humanity.
Albert Einstein was asked once how we could make our children intelligent.
His reply was both simple and wise.
If you want your children to be intelligent,” he said, read them fairy tales.
If you want them to be more intelligent, read them more fairy tales.”
He understood the value of reading, and of imagining.
I hope we can give our children a world in which they will read, and be read to, and imagine, and understand.
Chapter One
Invitation to the High Places
She lived with her friends and fellow workers Mercy and Peace in a tranquil little white cottage in the village of Much-Trembling.
She loved her work and desired intensely to please the Chief Shepherd, but happy as she was in most ways, she was conscious of several things which hindered her in her work and caused her much secret distress and shame.
In the first place she was a cripple, with feet so crooked that they often caused her to limp and stumble as she went about her work.
She had also the very unsightly blemish of a crooked mouth which greatly disfigured both expression and speech and was sadly conscious that these ugly blemishes must be a cause of astonishment and offense to many who knew that she was in the service of the great Shepherd.
Most earnestly she longed to be completely delivered from these shortcomings and to be made beautiful, gracious, and strong as were so many of the Shepherd's other workers, and above all to be made like the Chief Shepherd himself.
But she feared that there could be no deliverance from these two crippling disfigurements and that they must continue to mar her service always.
There was, however, another and even greater trouble in her life.
She was a member of the Family of Fearings, and her relatives were scattered all over the valley, so that she could never really escape from them.
An orphan, she had been brought up in the home of her aunt, poor Mrs. Dismal Forebodings, with her two cousins Gloomy and Spiteful and their brother Craven Fear, a great bully who habitually tormented and persecuted her in a really dreadful way.
Like most of the other families who lived in the Valley of Humiliation, all the Fearings hated the Chief Shepherd and tried to boycott his servants, and naturally it was a great offense to them that one of their own family should have entered his service.
Consequently they did all they could both by threats and persuasions to get her out of his employment, and one dreadful day they laid before her the family dictum that she must immediately marry her cousin Craven Fear and settle down respectably among her own people.
If she refused to do this of her own free will, they threatened to use force and compel her.
Poor Much-Afraid was, of course, overwhelmed with horror at the mere idea, but her relatives always terrified her, and she had never learned to resist or ignore their threats, so she simply sat cowering before them, repeating again and again that nothing would induce her to marry Craven Fear, but she was quite unable to escape from their presence.
The unhappy interview therefore lasted a long time, and when finally they did leave her for a while, it was already early evening.
With a surge of relief, Much-Afraid remembered that the Chief Shepherd would then be leading his flocks to their accustomed watering place beside a lovely cascade and pool on the outskirts of the village.
To this place she was in the habit of going very early every morning to meet him and learn his wishes and commands for the day, and again in the evenings to give her report on the day's work.
It was now time to meet him there beside the pool, and she felt sure he would help her and not permit her relatives to kidnap her and force her to leave his service for the dreadful slavery of marriage with Craven Fear.
Still shaking with fear and without pausing to wash the tears from her face, Much-Afraid shut the door of the cottage and started off for the cascade and the pool.
The quiet evening light was filling the Valley of Humiliation with a golden glow as she left the village and started to cross the fields.
Beyond the river, the mountains which bounded the eastern side of the Valley like towering ramparts were already tinged with pink, and their deep gorges were filled with lovely and mysterious shadows.
Through the quiet and peace of this tranquil evening, poor, terrified Much-Afraid came to the pool where the Shepherd was waiting for her and told him of her dreadful plight.
What shall I do? she cried as she ended the recital.
How can I escape?
They can't really force me to marry my cousin Craven, can they?
Oh! cried she, overwhelmed again at the very thought of such a prospect, it is dreadful enough to be Much-Afraid, but to think of having to be Mrs. Craven Fear for the rest of my life and never able to escape from the torment of it is more than I can bear.
Don't be afraid, said the Shepherd gently.
You are in my service, and if you will trust me they will not be able to force you against your will into any family alliance.
But you ought never to have let your Fearing relatives into your cottage, because they are enemies of the King who has taken you into his employment.
They are everywhere and now that they are determined to get me into their power again I shall never dare venture outside my cottage alone for fear of being kidnapped.
As she spoke she lifted her eyes and looked across the Valley and the river to the lovely sunset-lighted peaks of the mountains, then cried out in desperate longing, Oh, if only I could escape from this Valley of Humiliation altogether and go to the High Places, completely out of reach of all the Fearings and my other relatives!
No sooner were these words uttered when to her complete astonishment the Shepherd answered, I have waited a long time to hear you make that suggestion, Much- Afraid.
It would indeed be best for you to leave the Valley for the High Places, and I will very willingly take you there myself.
The lower slopes of those mountains on the other side of the river are the borderland of my Father's Kingdom, the Realm of Love.
No Fears of any kind are able to live there because 'perfect love casteth out fear and everything that torments. '
Much-Afraid stared at him in amazement.
Go to the High Places, she exclaimed, and live there?
Oh, if only I could!
For months past the longing has never left me.
I think of it day and night, but it is not possible.
I could never get there, I am too lame.
She looked down at her malformed feet as she spoke, and her eyes again filled with tears and despair and self-pity.
These mountains are so steep and dangerous.
I have been told that only the hinds and the deer can move on them safely.
It is quite true that the way up to the High Places is both difficult and dangerous, said the Shepherd.
It has to be, so that nothing which is an enemy of Love can make the ascent and invade the Kingdom.
Nothing blemished or in any way imperfect is allowed there, and the inhabitants of the High Places do need 'hinds' feet'.
I have them myself, he added with a smile, and like a young hart or a roebuck I can go leaping on the mountains and skipping on the hills with the greatest ease and pleasure.
But, Much-Afraid, I could make yours like hinds' feet also, and set you upon the High Places.
You could serve me then much more fully and be out of reach of all your enemies.
I am delighted to hear that you have been longing to go there, for, as I said before, I have been waiting for you to make that suggestion.
Then, he added, with another smile, you would never have to meet Craven Fear again.
Much-Afraid stared at him in bewilderment.
Make my feet like hinds' feet, she repeated, How is that possible?
And what would the inhabitants of the Kingdom of Love say to the presence of a wretched little cripple with an ugly face and a twisted mouth, if nothing blemished and imperfect may dwell there?
It is true, said the Shepherd, that you would have to be changed before you could live on the High Places, but if you are willing to go with me, I promise to help you develop hinds' feet.
Up there on the mountains, as you get near the real High Places, the air is fresh and invigorating.
It strengthens the whole body and there are streams with wonderful healing properties, so that those who bathe in them find all their blemishes and disfigurements washed away, But there is another thing I must tell you.
Not only would I have to make your feet like hinds' feet, but you would have to receive another name, for it would be as impossible for a Much-Afraid to enter the Kingdom of Love as for any other member of the Fearing family.
Are you willing to be changed completely, Much-Afraid, and to be made like the new name which you will receive if you become a citizen in the Kingdom of Love?
She nodded her head and then said very earnestly, Yes, I am.
Again he smiled, but added gravely, There is still one thing more, the most important of all No one is allowed to dwell in the Kingdom of Love, unless they have the flower of Love already blooming in their hearts.
Has Love been planted in your heart, Much- Afraid?
As the Shepherd said this he looked at her very steadily and she realized that his eyes were searching into the very depths of her heart and knew all that was there far better than she did herself.
She did not answer for a long time, because she was not sure what to say, but she looked rather flinchingly into the eyes which were gazing at her so penetratingly and became aware that they had the power of reflecting what they looked upon.
She could thus really see her own heart as he saw it, so after a long pause she answered, I think that what is growing there is a great longing to experience the joy of natural, human love and to learn to love supremely one person who will love me in return.
But perhaps that desire, natural and right as it seems, is not the Love of which you are speaking?
She paused and then added honestly and almost tremblingly, I see the longing to be loved and admired growing in my heart, Shepherd, but I don't think I see the kind of Love that you are talking about, at least, nothing like the love which I see in you.
Then will you let me plant the seed of true Love there now?  asked the Shepherd.
It will take you some time to develop hinds' feet and to climb to the High Places, and if I put the seed in your heart now it will be ready to bloom by the time you get there.
Much-Afraid shrank back.
I am afraid, she said.
I have been told that if you really love someone you give that loved one the power to hurt and pain you in a way nothing else can.
That is true, agreed the Shepherd.
To love does mean to put yourself into the power of the loved one and to become very vulnerable to pain, and you are very Much- Afraid of pain, are you not?
She nodded miserably and then said shamefacedly, Yes, very much afraid of it.
But it is so happy to love, said the Shepherd quietly.
It is happy to love even if you are not loved in return.
There is pain too, certainly, but Love does not think that very significant.
Much-Afraid thought suddenly that he had the most patient eyes she had ever seen.
At the same time there was something in them that hurt her to the heart, though she could not have said why, but she still shrank back in fear and said (bringing the words out very quickly because somehow she was ashamed to say them), I would never dare to love unless I were sure of being loved in return.
If I let you plant the seed of Love in my heart will you give me the promise that I shall be loved in return?
I couldn’t bear it otherwise.”
The smile he turned on her then was the gentlest and kindest she had ever seen, yet once again, and for the same indefinable reason as before, it cut her to the quick.
Yes, he said, without hesitation, l promise you, Much-Afraid, that when the plant of Love is ready to bloom in your heart and when you are ready to change your name, then you will be loved in return.
A thrill of joy went through her from head to foot.
It seemed too wonderful to be believed, but the Shepherd himself was making the promise, and of one thing she was quite sure.
He could not lie.
Please plant Love in my heart now,'' she said faintly.
Poor little soul, she was still Much-Afraid even when promised the greatest thing in the world.
The Shepherd put his hand in his bosom, drew something forth, and laid it in the palm of his hand.
Then he held his hand out toward Much-Afraid.
Here is the seed of Love, he said.
She bent forward to look, then gave a startled little cry and drew back.
