I TRAVELLED the next day on a train along a secondary railway line to Zidani Most and then changed and took a train to Zagreb.
This time, there were no patrols at the border; in fact, I had no idea where the border was.
The show of Slovenian strength was for the mainline only, it seemed.
Along the way I could see the spiky spires of churches on the top of wooded hills.
We passed small holdings with barns beside them in the shape of oversized abacuses for drying hay or wood.
As we passed each station the station master would walk out on to the platform, perfectly dressed, and salute the train.
In Zagreb I left my bags in the station and bought a ticket for the night train to Vienna.
I walked up to the main square, which was different on an ordinary working evening: there were crowds of people waiting for trams, it was busier, the shops were all lit up, and the cafes on the upper side of the square nearest the cathedral seemed more elegant now that it was not drizzling.
I spent a couple of hours wandering around the square as though it were a little city in itself.
Every now and then the general sense of ordinariness, the city at the end of the day, was disrupted by the appearance of soldiers in fatigues, big serious-looking fellows crossing the square, but no one else paid any attention to them.
In one cafe, I watched as friends arrived at the neighbouring table and there was the ceremony of greeting and sitting down again and looking at the menu and talking to the waitress.
A feeling that these people had money and had been doing this sort of thing all their lives.
I watched from the plate-glass window of a cafe as the rush in the square slowed down and settled into silence for the evening.
There were a lot of desolate-looking people hanging around the corridors of the railway station, the only place where you could keep warm in the city if you had no money.
I watched as one of them, a man in his forties, strayed into the bar.
A Croatian soldier moved slowly towards him, to the amusement of his colleagues, ceremoniously caught him by the shoulders and steered him back to the corridor.
At the border between Croatia and Austria, a guard opened the door of my sleeping cabin and shone a torch in my face and asked me if l had any whisky or cigarettes.
I told him I did not.
The next guard wanted to see my passport.
I fell asleep again and the next time I woke up the train was about to arrive in Vienna.
Within half an hour I found a connection to Bratislava and arrived there around midday.
It was now the Friday of Easter week.
I booked into a hotel overlooking the Danube and rang a man called Juraj Mihalik whose name I had been given as a good guide to the recent changes in Slovakia.
As I walked around Bratislava I realised that it did not match Prague as a capital city, which must be difficult for the new state: everyone from outside would immediately start comparing it to the Czech Republic.
Some of the old buildings were stately and dignified, but there seemed to be restoration and reconstruction going on in every street so that it was hard to look at the city as you walked around without seeing cement-mixers and lorries.
I went into the new national gallery, and I tried to stop myself thinking of the national gallery in Prague up on the hill, the sheer grandeur of it, as against the modesty of this small building in a provincial capital on the Danube which had suddenly and unexpectedly become the capital city of a new state.
Close to my hotel was another gallery, which had obviously been restored inthe 196os: originally, there was an eighteenth-century building overlooking the river to which had been added a huge monstrosity like the sort of corridor which gets you from one terminal to another in an airport; this linked the upper storeys of the two wings.
It was out on its own as a piece of interventionist architecture.
That evening I took a taxi to Juraj Mihalik's apartment, which was in a large cement-faced house on a hill not far from the city centre.
He was in his early forties, a friendly, relaxed, open-faced character.
The main room of his apartment was one of those rooms that you catch a glimpse of in foreign cities: full of shadowy, lamp-lit spaces, walls painted white, paintings and a sense of people at ease in the evening.
Juraj 's wife, Tana, was in the room, wearing jeans and a loose top and no shoes.
They both exuded physical wellbeing; there was not an ounce of spare flesh on either of them; they could have been Americans in an apartment in Manhattan.
We had a drink and sat down.
Juraj began to talk, moving back and forth over Slovakian history and recent political upheavals.
Tana interrupted him often, making him explain things in more detail, or adding comments.
I wanted to know their views first on what had happened in Slovakia during the war.
I don't know why I believed that this was a good place to start.
Slovakia was more or less on Hitler's side, Juraj said.
The state of Czechoslovakia was created after the First World War, but since the Czech Republic was richer, Slovakia was always treated as its little brother to the east; there was tension between the two all the time.
Slovakia took its historical chance in the Second World War, he said, and agreed to play the role of a puppet state for Hitler.
It was a free state, a fascistic state, with a Catholic priest for president.
Sixty thousand Jews were deported to Poland in the first years of the war, but deportations were stopped in the later years, once it became clear that they were being deported to death-camps.
But Slovakia had the same laws against Jews as did Germany.
There was no war in Slovakia until the main war was over; the country was liberated by the Americans and the Russians.
In school, in the 1950s, the fascist period in Slovakia's history was completely ignored; instead, teachers concentrated on the uprising at the end of the war and the heroism of the communists.
It was not illegal to go to church then, Juraj said, but if you went you were in serious trouble, you could lose your job, your children would not be asked to attend secondary school.
In the 1950s older people, retired people and workers who had bad jobs went to church, people who had nothing to lose.
The regime, he told me, tried to influence the church, and priests collaborated with the regime while others did not.
He himself did not make his first communion but others did; many went out to villages and did it secretly.
In 1971 his own sister got married and had a wedding in a church in a small village.
The Prague Spring was led by Dubcek, a Slovak who spoke Slovakian, unlike others who went to Prague and spoke only Czech.
Later, he would get to know Dubcek and admire him for his sense of justice and his sense of humour.
But the idea that he would travel one day to Washington with Dubcek was unimaginable in the dark years after the Prague Spring.
It was always difficult being a Slovak in the federation, he said.
Anyone in Bratislava who wanted to improve their career prospects moved to Prague.
Only about 4 per cent of those working in the diplomatic service were Slovaks.
Juraj himself had good friends in Prague: they had a common problem - communism.
There were only about seventy people killed during the Russian invasion, and in the immediate aftermath people were not sent to prison.
Things were done slowly step by step.
Since Juraj's parents were not communists he could not get into art school in Czechoslovakia; instead, he got a place in Krakow.
In 1975 he was invited by a family to visit the United States.
It was always possible, he said, to get an exit visa, even though very few did.
He loved New York.
By this time he was studying at the Academy of Fine Arts in Bratislava, and, on his return he was expelled, told that he would have an imperialist influence on his fellow- students.
The official reason was given as 'a sudden loss of talent'.
Even though he now views the election of Pope John Paul II as vitally important, in 1978 he viewed it merely as a big event for Poland.
The relationship between Prague and Bratislava remained the same throughout this period.
For everything important you had to go to Prague; Slovakia was for lakes and rivers and mountains.
Slovakia was a poor primitive country; the industry and the wealth were in the hands of the Czechs.
There were no embassies in Bratislava, and none of the connections to the outside world which the western embassies in Prague offered to dissidents.
While there were a thousand Czech signatories to Charter 77, only fifty Slovaks signed.
But there was a dissident movement within Slovakia, he said, operating through the Church and the environmental movement, rather than Charter 77 or foreign channels.
In 1983 Juraj was permitted to make and sell flower-pots; in the looser atmosphere of the Gorbachev years he began to export ceramics to Austria, and this business grew throughout the 198os.
In 1989 he went to the United States once more, but this time was disappointed.
In his subsequent book about the Velvet Revolution, Velvet Failures, he wrote: 'During this stay in the US I totally lost my illusions about this paradise on earth.
I stayed with various people, particularly among the "lower class".
I could not believe how hard the life was for some Americans.
The driver on the New York bus line who worked ten hours a day could not afford to pay health insurance, let alone for a private flat in Manhattan.
I was told that more than twenty per cent of Americans couldn't afford health insurance.
I met an emigrant from Slovakia who worked as a shop assistant.
In a pub fight he lost his front teeth, and because of this ugly hole in his mouth he lost his job next day.
He didn't have the money to pay his dentist so he also couldn't pay his rent either and eventually became homeless.'
The first open demonstration in Slovakia against the regime was organised through the Catholic Church.
It took place on 25 March 1988.
People were asked to walk out of the churches and gather in one of the city's squares to ask for civil and religious freedom.
They were asked to carry lighted candles and remain silent.
The atmosphere was scary, Juraj said.
The police surrounded the square, they had water cannon and police dogs, but nothing happened.
In November the following year he was driving back to Bratislava when he heard the news that the Velvet Revolution had begun.
In Bratislava old friends of his, artists and actors, became the leaders of the revolution, and formed political parties m the new democracy.
At the beginning, Juraj said, Vaclav Havel was loved by everybody, and the problems between the two parts of Czechoslovakia did not surface.
As he wrote: 'Before 1989I did not have any strong feelings of nationality.
I literally hated Slovak folklore, since it had always been supported by communists to the detriment of modern world culture, which was forbidden.
I did not feel myself to be either Slovak or Czechoslovak. The only place I felt I belonged was Bratislava."
In the days after the revolution there was talk that the capital of the federation should be in Brno, which is halfway between Prague and Bratislava.
But there was a real sense that the Czechs did not understand Slovak sensitivities.
The idea, Juraj said, that there was no time for such matters now, that the establishment of a market economy must come first, was quite shocking for him.
He had been sure that Havel would understand the problem, that it could not continue under democracy as it had under communism.
After the revolution Juraj became a member of the Co-ordinating Committee of the Revolution, a twelve member body.
He spoke better English than the rest and worked on international relations.
In February 1990 he became acutely conscious that there were going to be serious difficulties between Havel and the Slovaks.
Havel had organised a trip to Washington and other North American capitals.
The delegation consisted of two hundred and ten people, the second biggest foreign delegation to Washington in history (the biggest was headed by de Gaulle).
Originally, there were to be eight Slovaks, but the new government rang from Prague and reduced the number to four, and then put it back to eight when there were protests.
This was followed by a trip to Israel. No Slovak politician was included; the two Slovaks in the delegation were representatives of the Jewish community.
For Juraj, it was vital that a Slovak politician be present to apologise for what happened to the Jews in Slovakia during the war, and to make clear that the new Slovakia harboured no anti-Semitic feelings.
In the end the actor Milan Knazko, a close friend of Juraj's and a leader of the revolution in Bratislava, went and made a speech.
Milan Knazko's story,' Juraj wrote in his book, 'as Havel's Slovak adviser at the Prague Castle speaks for itself.
He accepted the post with the original intention that he would later become a vice-president - a step that Slovakia would have welcomed, but it never came about.
The opposite happened, since Knazko often disagreed with Havel and his team and strongly fought for Slovak interests. After several weeks in the Castle he lost direct access to the President and sometimes found himself waiting for days before Havel would agree to meet him.
There were ten million Czechs and five million Slovaks; the ruling class in Bratislava came to feel throughout 1990 that they were being treated as nice peasants who lived in the mountains, who did not know enough to be part of the great velvet future, whose education out of their fascism and their Catholicism would take a long time.
Prague was not even aware that there was a festering Slovak problem, as there was no Slovak newspaper available in Prague and no Slovak politician close to Havel.
Slovak emigrants in the United States pointed out that as far as the western media were concerned, Slovakia did not exist.
In Prague, members of the old communist ruling class were slowly returning to positions of power, but in Bratislava, no one in the VPN (People Against Violence) had any political experience.
Juraj wrote: 'Our ideas about the world of politics, diplomacy and security were based on adventure novels rather than experience or logic.
I remember my naivety when I agreed to go to the US embassy in Vienna, contact the CIA there and ask them to come to the VPN headquarters to check whether the building was bugged.
They couldn't believe their ears when I asked them to put me in touch with the secret service and said there were no such people there.
Eventually, a man responsible for security matters did see me.
He might have been from the CIA but could naturally never say so.
He gave me an address of an Austrian firm that provided this service, warned me it was expensive and saw me out the door.'
In the spring of 1990 discussion began over the name of the federation and whether there should be a dash between Czech and Slovak.
Various Czech politicians openly made fun of the Slovaks and said that the dash could be used in Bratislava but not abroad.
Slovaks, in turn, suggested that their state should be mentioned first, as in Slovakoczech.
In Prague, this was viewed as a joke.
Still, throughout 1990 Juraj believed that the federation could be preserved and he wanted to remain a citizen of Czechoslovakia, whether it had a dash or not.
But early in 1991 he began to change his mind.
On 14 March a demonstration was organised in Bratislava to commemorate the setting up of the Slovak state in 1939.
Between two and three thousand people attended, which was tiny compared to the huge demonstrations which had taken place at the time of the revolution when more than a hundred thousand people would turn up.
There were two thousand wild Slovaks, Juraj remembered, a mixture of fascists, communists, anti-Semites and nationalists.
For them, Vaclav Havel was the real enemy.
Juraj noticed that there was a surprising number of foreign journalists and camera crews covering this demonstration and then he understood.
Without informing the Slovak minister for the interior, 'Citizen' Havel, as Juraj called him, had arrived in Slovakia and begun a walkabout during the demonstration.
The demonstrators attacked Havel, spat on him, kicked him and shouted abuse at him and the TV crews filmed all of this.
They had, Juraj said, beautiful material of primitive Slovaks attacking the most loved politician in the world.
Havel, he believed, must have known that they would get such footage.
He blamed Havel for coming to Bratislava that day.
He was also outraged by the way friends of his who had become Slovak politicians had been treated; one, he believed, had been accused of being a police informer under the old regime because he opposed Havel's policies on Slovakia.
He noticed that former friends now in power were becoming increasingly pompous.
In his book he wrote of a former colleague:
When I visited him in Prague and tried to explain something which he wasn't prepared to accept as valid, he asked whether I realised I was talking to the Federal Minister of the Interior.
Another example: a director who was spontaneously greeted on the street by her friend's son lectured the boy "the times have changed and you cannot address me as Susanne anymore."
On holidays in the mountains, a minister's wife wanted us to "respect her husband's office".
No one in the political mainstream in Slovakia had ever intended to secede from Czechoslovakia, he insisted, but when Havel announced, for example, that his country was not going to produce arms any more he did so without considering that Slovakia was where the arms were produced, and a sudden shut-down of arms factories would have a devastating effect on the economy there.
Even after separation, Juraj believed, the campaign against Slovakia was still going on; the idea was being put out that the Czechs were good, progressive, smart, intelligent and the Slovaks were unstable, anti-Semitic old-fashioned, pro-communist.
There are differences between the Czechs and the Slovaks, he said.
The Czechs are more eloquent, they have a stronger literary and artistic tradition, they are more secular, like Protestants, and they take ideology seriously.
The Slovaks are more conservative, seventy per cent of them are Catholic, they are more down to earth and not so ready to be influenced by ideology.
The way the Czechs have been treating us, he said, seems OK only because we are Catholics, but if we were Muslims it would be quite different, there would be war.
In Slovakia, he told me, there has never been the same urge for revenge for what happened under the communists, they were ready to forgive; the Czechs, on the other hand, wanted to go through the files and blame people.
They are more cerebral, he said, more interested in money; we are more emotional.
The two nations did not have to separate; but, at the time, there was no better solution.
He himself decided to get out of politics and turned down several offers, including the Ministry for Culture and the ambassadorship to Washington.
He wanted to build up his business and was glad, he laughed, that he did not have to get up in the morning for meetings.
He had been talking for hours, and I had been taking notes and asking questions, and Tana had been listening and adding details.
We were exhausted. It was late.
I felt that they still saw themselves as having a role in the new Slovakia, and talking to me, telling me about events from the Slovak point of view, was part of this.
We had a beer.
Juraj went to the phone and discovered that the KDH, the Christian Democratic Party, which had been in a coalition government after the 1990 elections but was now in opposition, was having its annual conference.
It might be difficult for him to go there, he said, making clear that the divisions and splits in the years since the fall of communism had caused a good deal of personal bitterness in Bratislava.
But he would take me there at lunchtime and see what happened.
He and Tana discussed various characters who would be there, people they had worked with just a few years ago, and they laughed at what it would be like for Juraj to appear suddenly at the party conference.
It was hard to sleep after all this information.
Juraj and Tana had talked as though all this had just happened to them, they had spoken with that peculiar intensity of people after an accident or a bereavement.
I tried to think about it, work it all out, but when I saw them again at noon the next day, I felt as though I had not left their company at all.
Juraj had a fancy car outside the apartment building, and I could see, as we sat in it to drive to his studio, that he enjoyed having a car like this.
He put a tape on as he drove up through the city and then along narrow twisting roads, climbing all the time.
The studio was a house in its own grounds at the end of a lane.
I had never really asked what sort of ceramics he made, and there seemed to be no examples in his apartment.
But, here I could see what he did and why it was so successful.
His pieces were elaborate jokes: his tea-pot, for example, was not completely useful, but it would be a good souvenir, or present; it looked well made and funny at the same time.
I could see how it might be more fun making these and marketing them than being the Slovak Ambassador to Washington.
Juraj was thinking about the Christian Democrats, going through the names of people who might be there, wondering whom I should meet. '
The Christian Democrats feel so bad about being out of power,' he said and chuckled.
We drove back down to the city centre; he parked outside a modern building where the conference was going on.
It was now lunchtime, so there should be people free, he said.
As soon as we went into the main hall I could see why Juraj was not a member of the Christian Democrats.
There were groups of men standing around; those who were not middle-aged looked as though they soon would be.
They all had that slightly worn, cautious appearance of men who join centrist political parties.
Juraj might have been the wayward son of any of these men in suits, although he was the same age as some of them.
He was dressed confidently in casual clothes, his hair was styled. He stood out in the hall.
He greeted a few people and then spoke to a man who moved quickly away.
A few people looked at him.
I was standing close to the door.
He came over and said that this wasn't easy, but he thought he might be able to get me a senior figure who spoke English.
One man, with whom he had worked, had moved away from him, he said.
I told him that I had seen this happen.
After a while we were ushered into a long office which was comfortably furnished.
I felt that Juraj was excited being here and was looking forward to what the politician, who was called Jan Carnogursky, was going to say to a foreign journalist.
Carnogursky was in his fifties. He was a thin man with a cautious and serious appearance.
His parents were both teachers, he said, but his father had been a political activist before the war and had supported the Slovak state during the war.
After the war he had tried to establish a Catholic party, and was imprisoned.
Carnogursky was brought up as a Catholic.
He went to Mass on Sunday.
Everyone around him, he said, was anti-communist.
He didn't think that anyone in Slovakia was pro-communist, although some people joined the party.
But there was only one youth organisation, which was communist-run and he was a member; almost all young people were members.
He lost three years of schooling because of the political activities of his father; he wasn't allowed into secondary school.
He got a secondary education simply because his father had friends in the north of the country and he went to school there; the communists were not well-organised enough throughout the country to know who he was and prevent him.
He did not support the Prague Spring.
His family remained anti-communist, and the fact that this softening in the regime was run by communists was enough for him.
He managed to study to become a lawyer and specialised in labour law, representing, for example, teachers who had been seen at Mass and fired, or teachers who had sent their children for religious instruction and been fired, or a senior doctor who had attended Mass and was fired.
These were all unwritten rules, he said, and thus could be challenged in the courts.
Later, he defended people who had signed Charter 77, but in 1981 he was banned from practising as a lawyer.
He drove a factory jeep for a while, then worked as a lawyer for the factory, then for a farmers' co-operative.
From 1987 he was unemployed again and the following years he started secretly to edit and distribute Christian Democratic propaganda.
The second half of the 198os, he said, saw the rise of the organised Catholic movement in Slovakia.
There were pilgrimages to holy shrines.
In 1987, for example, he told me, about six hundred thousand people took part in pilgrimages in Slovakia, and through this a self-conscious Catholic movement took shape.
The state allowed and, in certain respects, encouraged an official church, but this was organised by a secret church, and it was the secret church which planned that first demonstration in March 1988, a secret church made up of priests and lay activists.
In 1989 he was imprisoned; in November when the revolution began he was sharing a tiny cell.
He knew that the Berlin Wall had fallen, and he knew there were demonstrations in Prague and Bratislava, but one night he could hear clapping and shouting, he could hear the crowds outside.
That was 23 November 1989 and there were five thousand people demonstrating in front of the prison.
('I was there,' Juraj interjected as Carnogursky described the scene.)
Two days later he was released, let out into the street alone.
He took a tram home.
A few days later he was a member of the delegation which negotiated with the government, demanding the participation of the opposition in a new government, followed by free elections.
He was the only Slovak in the ten-person delegation, but that was not an issue then; overcoming communism, he said, was the aim, everyone's overwhelming aim.
On 10 December, two weeks after he was freed, the government caved in.
Suddenly, he was deputy prime minister of Czechoslovakia. He had cars, telephones, a secretariat.
After twenty-five years in opposition all at once he had to become engaged in all aspects of the state.
He just changed his point of view, he said, as if it all had really been very easy.
He was in charge of new legislation, passing, for example, a law governing the freedom of the press.
Although he was based in Prague he started to organise his party in Bratislava.
He had always been aware, he said, of the problems between the Czechs and the Slovaks and he gave me precisely the same definition of the difference as had Juraj.
The Czechs were more rational and western; the Slovaks more emotional.
In ways, he said, the difficulties between the two nations were caused by Czech lethargy in relation to Slovak grievances.
He was not a Slovak nationalist; for him anti-communism was more important.
Nationalism, he said, is always quite easy to misuse, as a means of mobilising people.
A good number of former communists, he told me, quickly became nationalists.
He himself wanted the relationship between the two states to be modelled on states of the European Union.
I asked him about the war years.
During the war, he said, Slovakia was formally independent for the first time.
The Slovak state was quite successful, he said, economically, culturally, politically.
Its president was a Catholic priest, Dr Josef Tiso, and there is, he said, a positive feeling among Catholics about this state.
At the time, Carnogursky believed, Slovakia had two options: to be divided between Poland, Hungary and Germany, or to become a puppet state under Hitler.
The period is controversial, he added.
I merely asked questions.
I did not argue, I underlined what he had said in my notebook: The Slovak state was quite successful, economically, culturally, politically.
I had expected him to hedge his bets, fudge the issue, but he seemed to have no idea how important this was.
It was the same problem as the Croatians had: how to deal with that period when Hitler offered them a quisling state and they accepted, how to deal with history that was still remembered by others such as Serbs and Jews as dark and murderous, but by Croats and Slovaks as the first time they had a state as well as a nation.
No one in the West now in a Christian Democratic party would admit to seeing the Hitler period as anything other than disgusting.
Carnogursky was naive; he was just beginning.
But I felt, all the same, that he needed to know, as other countries had learned in the years after the war, what the word Hitler meant to Jews, gypsies and homosexuals in Europe; and how the quisling states bear a guilt for what happened.
As we left the building I presumed that Juraj had similar feelings and I spoke to him as though we shared a political outlook.
But he did not understand what I was talking about.
The war years, he said, we have nothing to do with them; and we still don't know enough about them.
I walked to the car with him and we drove back towards his studio.
I spent that afternoon in a house close to the studio which had a big garden.
Friends of Juraj and Tana's were hosting a barbecue.
People dropped in for a while, had a drink and left, and then others came.
Juraj and Tana went to do some work, but I stayed on.
Everyone was bright and well-dressed and thirtysomething.
The food was good, and the air was warm enough for us to sit out on the veranda, even though the sky was full of pale, low cloud.
An American couple working as volunteers in a local bank told us how Prague was full of Americans now, Bratislava was a much better place to be if you want to mix in the society.
At the first hints of twilight a couple came to collect their son who had been playing in the garden.
They were different from the rest, taller, much more glamorous, a bit older; even when they didn't talk - and the man said nothing most of the time, merely watched everything and smiled - they appeared to be the centre of things.
I wondered who they were and what they did.
He looked like someone I had seen on television.
He was in his early forties and dressed in black; his wife was elegant with long blonde hair.
He seemed half bored, sitting there nursing a beer, as though his mind was elsewhere; he exuded a restless sort of contentment.
It was only when Tana returned that I learned he was Milan Knazko, the actor who had led the revolution in Bratislava, who had addressed all the meetings in November 1989, who held the crowd in the power of his presence.
He was the one who used to shout 'Make a corridor' if someone was ill at the front of the crowd and needed to be carried to the back, until the phrase became a catch-cry.
And he was in power in the days after the revolution, and lost power in the intricate political machinations in Bratislava in 1990 and 1991, but there was talk now that he might return to politics, no one knew.
I thought of how hard it must be to have known those days when you could lead your country, hold the crowd, realising that the days would never come back, that afterwards everything would be dull and distant.
People who get a taste of power always find it hard to do without it.
He asked me what I was writing about.
Catholic Europe,' I said.
I'm Lutheran,' he replied and smiled, as if to say that he was sorry he could not be any use to me.
He stood up to go.
As they collected their son, it struck me that they were going home and would not go out again, but would sit in tonight: something a politician would never have to do.
Just a few years ago the phone rang for Knazko day and night.
It was cold now and the party was breaking up.
Tana and I agreed to walk into the city, but as we left I noticed a sort of quarry in front of the house.
It was a grotto, and there were a few candles lit in front of the statue of the Virgin, and a woman kneeling praying.
There were trees all around offering shelter, and they rustled suddenly in a gust of wind.
I saw a woman standing behind a tree, like a shadow, praying.
There were plaques stuck to the stone in German, Hungarian and Slovak, with names and dates from the early years of the century, some of them - Tana translated for me thanking the Virgin for recovery from an illness.
It was strange standing here, having been so close all afternoon without knowing that there was a grotto nearby.
As we walked back up the steps to the road I could hear shouting in the distance, as though there was a football match going on.
Tana said it was a bar.
It was still open.
All the clientele were sitting outside at tables, most of them were young and many of them were seriously drunk, roaring out songs and slogans and queuing at the hatch for more big glass tankards oflager.
The beer was strong, Tana said, it made you drunk easily.
It was freezing now that darkness had fallen, but this put none of the drinkers off.
We had beers and tried to talk despite the terrible, loud singing coming from the other tables.
I was not entirely sure that this scene and the scene at the grotto with the woman praying in the shadow of the tree were not from a dream, or a movie, or something imagined.
But the cold was real.
And we went back to talking about politics.
Knazko was a popular film, TV and theatre actor, Tana told me, and after the revolution he moved to Prague to become an adviser to Havel.
Once he grew disillusioned with Havel, he became a member of the Slovak parliament and Minister for Foreign Relations, but he had lost power in the many splits and personality clashes which had arisen since independence.
He was good during the revolution, she said, brilant with the crowd, but he was not so interested in the systems and structures you have to apply when you are running a country.
I told her how amazed I had been by Carnogursky's response to the question about the war years and the quisling Slovak state.
She shook her head and said that no one in Bratislava now knew much about the period; they were not sure what was communist propaganda and what was truth.
Historians would have to do more research, she said.
I did not know what to say.
We went back to Tana and Juraj's apartment.
Friends called around, people they had known for years who had nothing to do with politics, and they sat around talking for the evening.
I asked them if they knew a good bar in Bratislava that was open late, and they gave me an address which was near my hotel.
I went back to the hotel and read for a while and had a shower.
It was nearly midnight and the streets were completely deserted.
It was platonic Eastern Europe, where everything happened indoors, where nothing moved at night.
The world had closed down.
I followed my directions until I arrived at one of the many small alleys in the city, but still there was no sign of life.
This was, none the less, where they had told me to come.
I noticed an open doorway with a light on and I peered in: there was a stairway to a cellar.
I walked down. I could hear the drum thuds of rock music in the distance somewhere.
Suddenly someone opened a door and the music became loud and I knew I was in the right place.
I walked into a cellar which had been done up into a disco and bar.
It was full of well-dressed, trendy-looking people.
I went up to the bar and had a beer.
It was Sunday morning in Bratislava.
I had a vague hangover as I toured the streets, comforting now in their lack of grandeur.
Juraj had told me how much the city had been destroyed by a motorway cut through the old quarter.
The new road had barely spared the cathedral, almost grazing it as it sped past.
There was thus no great square in front of the cathedral, and there was no easy access to the old quarter or the Jewish quarter across the motorway.
The Danube always seemed distant from the centre.
They would never have done this to Prague, I found myself thinking.
I was ready to go home now, wandering around, killing time before my train was due to leave.
In the city centre, near one of the old churches, as people came out of Mass, preparing to disappear once more into the hidden domestic life of the city, there was a stall selling books by and about Dr Josef Tiso, who ran Slovakia for Hider between 1939 and 1945.
The books looked dogeared and badly produced; they were cheap.
Two elderly women sat on chairs beside the stall, a few men stood behind them.
They watched as the crowds streamed out of the church.
No one paid any attention to them, no one stopped at the stall, or bought their books.
They had the air of people who belonged to an old world, a time gone by.
And on that Sunday morning, the First Sunday after Easter 1993, the works of Dr Josef Tiso did not seem to interest the people of Bratislava on their way home from Mass.
