The collar should hang loose, with a dangling counterweight below.
He wants to be sure that Anne's isn't snugged up to her throat like a noose.
Three other men lag back.
One is David Daballen, a bright young Samburu protégé of Douglas-Hamilton's, who often accompanies the boss on missions like this.
The second man is a local guide holding a Winchester 308 rifle.
The third is me.
As we watch Douglas-Hamilton edging forward, we notice another female elephant, a big one, probably the group's matriarch, sidling around craftily on his right flank.
We duck low to escape the matriarch's view.
We freeze.
As this female comes on, suspicious and challenging, Douglas-Hamilton seems unconcerned with her, but Daballen begins to look nervous.
He is calculating (he'll tell me later) how fast an elephant might be able to charge across such a rocky, rubble-strewn slope.
Then the big female commits herself to a sequence of gestures suggesting nonchalance, if not outright contempt: She pisses torrentially, she defecates galumphingly, and she turns away.
For a few seconds the young female graces him with a frontal view of her large forehead, her flappy ears, her pretty tusks, as though posing for beauty shots in the glow of a flash.
She gives him a profile.
He raises his camera and clicks off several frames.
Then she too turns and ambles away.
Through his lens, in those seconds, he has seen that the collar hangs just as it should.
The alarm was a false one.
Anne is in no danger—or anyway, no danger of chafing or choking.
As we withdraw, circling back toward our vehicle, I think:
So that's how it's done.
Show a little caution, a little respect, get the information you need, back off.
And everybody is happy.
After four decades Douglas-Hamilton knows this species about as well as anyone in Africa.
He has a keen sense, well earned by field study and sharpened by love, of the individuality of the animals—their volatile moods, their subtle signals, their range of personalities and impulses.
Nothing about his interaction with Anne has prepared me for the moment, some weeks later, when I'll watch him charged, caught, thrown, and nearly tusked through the gut by an elephant.
SOON WE'RE ALOFT again in Douglas-Hamilton's Cessna, flying low over the contours of the landscape.
It's his preferred style, flying low; why go up a thousand feet when you can caress the topography?
So we rise and descend gently over the rocky slopes, the ridges, the dry acacia plains, the sand rivers, returning northeast toward a place called Samburu National Reserve.
Just beyond the reserve sits a gravel airstrip and, not far from that, his field camp.
We'll be home before dark.
Samburu National Reserve is one of the little known jewels of northern Kenya, taking its name from the proud tribe of warriors and pastoralists in which David Daballen, among others, has his roots.
The reserve is a relatively small area, just 65 square miles of semiarid savanna, rough highlands, dry washes (known locally as luggas), and riparian forests of acacia and doom palm along the north bank of the Ewaso Ngiro River.
Lacking paved roads, sparsely surrounded by Samburu herders, it teems with wildlife.
There are lions, leopards, and cheetahs, of course, but also Grevy's zebras, reticulated giraffes, beisa oryx, gerenuks, Somali ostriches and kori bustards.
But the dominant creatures are the elephants.
They play a major role in shaping the ecosystem itself—stripping bark from trees or uprooting them, keeping the savanna open.
They intimidate even the lions.
They come and go across the boundaries of the reserve, using it as a safe haven from human-related dangers in a much larger and more ambivalent landscape.
The larger landscape includes all of Samburu District (within which the reserve lies) and parts of three other districts, most notably Laikipia, a high-elevation patchwork of private ranches and sanctuaries, community conservation areas, wheat fields, fences, mountain slopes, stream valleys, roads, and shambas (small family farms) just to the south.
In Laikipia, zones of wildlife habitat, crop production, cattle husbandry, and human habitation are juxtaposed like a spilled box of multicolored mosaic tiles.
Samburu, by contrast, has fewer shambas and scarcely any fences.
The Samburu people, who speak a dialect of the Maa language, have shown little inclination to surrender their traditional ways—tending goats and cattle, costuming themselves resplendently (especially the young men) in beads and feathers and red shukas (blankets), exchanging raids against their ancient enemies—in favor of modern, pusillanimous practices such as growing crops.
Their traditionalism, along with a shortage of good soils and water and a growing awareness of the economic benefits of tourism, has so far spared Samburu District from the sort of intensive land conversion seen in parts of Laikipia.
The combined Samburu-Laikipia ecosystem comprises roughly 11,000 square miles, and within it live about 5,400 elephants—the largest population of Loxodonta Africana existing mainly outside protected areas anywhere in Kenya.
That population size and its current growth (at perhaps several percent a year) reflect the fact that Samburu-Laikipia is a productive, hospitable landscape for elephants, but two other adjectives are also applicable: edgy and complicated.
Within the mosaic of mixed uses and shifting seasonal conditions, elephants face certain risks.
So do people.
Conflicts occur, resulting occasionally in a crop devastated by raiding elephants, or a cow killed, or an elephant shot, or a person trampled and tusked.
And with Kenya's human population also growing by more than 2 percent annually, the potential for such conflicts can only increase.
Decisions will be made about what should be protected (Elephant travel corridors? Cornfields? The right of people to continue establishing new farms?) and what must be sacrificed.
It's not precisely the same research agenda with which he began his career, but it's in the same spirit.
It's where the contours of the landscape have led him.
IF YOU HAD ASKED ME, when I was ten years old, what I wanted to do,  Douglas-Hamilton says, I'd have said: I want to have an airplane; I want to fly around Africa and save the animals.
Aviation was part of his lineage.
His father, Lord David Douglas-Hamilton, had commanded a Spitfire squadron in the Battle of Malta and then died on a reconnaissance mission later in World War II; his three uncles had also been distinguished Royal Air Force (RAF) fliers.
One of those uncles had earlier become the first man to pilot an open-cockpit biplane (he was dressed warmly) over the summit of Mount Everest, just for the sheer glorious hell of doing it.
After the war Iain's mother was remarried, to a kindly man who read Iain stories about Africa and who took the family to live in Cape Town, then died abruptly himself.
At age 13, Iain found himself back in Britain at a Scottish boarding school, nurturing dreams of a getaway.
As an undergraduate at Oxford, he would have joined the RAF Volunteer Reserve, following the path of his father and uncles, but poor vision disqualified him.
Zoology, fortunately, didn't require 20/20 eyesight.
Science for me was a passport to the bush, he says, not the other way around.
I became a scientist so I could live a life in Africa and be in the bush.
Almost wistfully, he adds, I would've liked to have been a game warden.
But for a young Scotsman who spoke no Swahili, in the early 1960s, just before Kenyan independence, such a civil employment position was out.
So he went to Tanzania as a research volunteer and then was offered a project in a small area called Lake Manyara National Park.
With a bit of money from selling some inherited stock, he bought himself an old 150-horsepower Piper Pacer, nimble enough for tracking big animals, and learned by trial and error to land it on rocky airstrips.
There at Manyara, Douglas-Hamilton did the first serious study of elephant social structure and spatial behavior (where they go, how long they stay) using radio telemetry.
It earned him a doctorate at Oxford.
He also became the first student of elephants to focus closely on living individuals, not just trends within populations or the analysis of dead specimens.
He got to know the elephants one by one, noted their individuating traits, gave them names, watched their social interactions.
Noticing the distinct traits of individuals and the generalized patterns within a population, Douglas-Hamilton began to wonder about motivations.
What did elephants need?
What did they want?
How did their movements on the landscape reflect those cravings?
What sort of choices did they make?
He married a Kenyan-born Italian beauty named Oria Rocco and took her back to the Tanzanian bush, where she shared his field life and his passion for elephants.
Together, during the 1970s, they produced one best-selling book, Among the Elephants, and two luminous daughters.
Photos from the time show Iain Douglas- Hamilton as a thin young man with wild, sun-bleached hair and nerdy glasses, wearing bush shorts and boots, sometimes a field vest but no shirt, deeply tanned, living a dashing life in the midst of friendly pachyderms: an amalgam of Tarzan, Clark Kent, and Doctor Doolittle.
Then came the grim years of the late 1970s and '80s, when Douglas-Hamilton played a lead role in raising the alarm against an ugly development—the wholesale slaughter of African elephants.
But this modern phase, driven by a sudden sharp rise in the price of ivory and made gruesomely efficient by automatic weapons, was on a different scale.
Between 1970 and 1977, according to one assessment, Kenya lost more than half its 120,000 elephants.
Ivory exports from the continent—just the legal exports to major markets, not even considering small markets or smuggling—totaled about two million pounds a year.
Based on that weight of tusks, Douglas-Hamilton calculated elephant losses throughout Africa at somewhere above 100,000 animals annually.
He decided to do something.
With funding from several conservation NGOs, Douglas-Hamilton organized a hugely ambitious survey to gauge the status of elephant populations throughout the continent.
He mailed out questionnaires to field biologists, game wardens, conservationists, and other well-informed people, asking for their counts or best estimates of local and regional populations, and he flew surveys himself.
From the results, compiled in 1979, he figured that Africa then contained about 1,3 million elephants.
It might seem like a sizable number, but there was a devil in the details; the trend lines pointed down.
African elephants were dying at an unsustainable rate, Douglas-Hamilton concluded, putting the viability of their populations at risk.
Some experts in the field disagreed, arguing that elephant populations were doing just fine, or at least that Douglas-Hamilton's data were unreliable.
Those disagreements eventually carried through the 1980s in a series of contentious meetings and bureaucratic battles that became known as the Ivory Wars.
Meanwhile Douglas-Hamilton had set aside his behavioral studies and spent years investigating the status of beleaguered elephant populations in Zaire, South Africa, Gabon, and elsewhere, both by overflying to count animals and by amateur sleuthing on the ground.
He went to the Central African Empire, nosed into the ivory trade there, and left quickly when the emperor, Jean-Bédel Bokassa, began to get curious about this visiting elephantologist.
He flew into Uganda amid the turmoil after Idi Amin's fall, and saw bullet-riddled elephant carcasses littering the national parks.
It was a dreadful time.
I really spent a terrible 20 years doing that, he says now.
His dangerous, gloomy work helped immeasurably to support the 1989 decision under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) to outlaw the international sale of ivory.
But on a personal level, it cost him—anxiety, years of his life, time away from his daughters, and time away from living elephants.
HIS WORK in Samburu National Reserve has reflected a new role in Douglas- Hamilton's life: mentoring young scientists.
He came, in 1997, along with a student he had placed there.
The student was George Wittemyer, an American Fulbright scholar who wanted to study elephant social relations.
By that time, Douglas-Hamilton had established his own research-and-conservation organization, Save the Elephants (STE), based in Nairobi.
He supplied Wittemyer with contacts, an aegis, and a couple of used tents, with which Wittemyer set up a simple field camp along the Ewaso Ngiro River, in the shade of some large acacia trees and near a conical hill.
Just as Douglas-Hamilton had done three decades earlier at Manyara, Wittemyer began learning the local elephants, sorting out their family affiliations, and naming them.
As in other elephant populations, each family was dominated and guided by a matriarch, an older female, mother or grandmother to most of the members.
Wittemyer grouped the names in mnemonic familial clusters, a system that has been continued by later researchers at Samburu: the Spice Girls (including Rosemary, Basil, and Sage), the First Ladies (Eleanor, Martha, Lucy Kibaki, Jackie), the Biblical Towns (Babylon, Nazareth, Jerusalem), the Royals (Victoria, Cleopatra, Anastasia, Diana), and many others.
Roughly 900 individual elephants use the Samburu reserve in the course of a year, either as residents or as short-term visitors, and most of them are identified in STE records.
Gradually the two-tent camp became a permanent compound, ascetic but comfortable, comprising a dozen wall tents, a thatch-roofed kitchen, an office-and-dining-hall structure with a concrete floor and wireless Internet, plus outhouses and bucket showers.
Douglas-Hamilton made this gracious outpost, now called Save the Elephants Camp, his base of operations.
Meanwhile Douglas-Hamilton, working with still other young collaborators, concentrates on the spatial dimension—that is, the study of which elephants move where, and when—using global positioning system technology.
The spatial study forms a high-tech complement to the low-tech behavioral observations.
DOUGLAS-HAMILTON REMEMBERS the first GPS unit he ever saw in action, brought to Kenya by friends in 1991 and rigged onto an airplane for use in counting elephants within Tsavo National Park.
That GPS unit registered only the whereabouts of the airplane, as the plane traced the whereabouts of the animals.
Still, he says, It was quite a revelation to see how the elephants moved and circled—the patterns they adopted.
The patterns were important because they reflected informed choices by the elephants as to where they might best satisfy their most urgent imperatives, finding what Douglas-Hamilton calls the three S's: sex, sustenance, and security.
GPS technology now offered a way to chart such patterns in detail.
As soon as I saw one of those gadgets, he says, I wanted to put it on an elephant.
About 20 elephants in the Samburu-Laikipia ecosystem currently wear Save the Elephants GPS collars.
The latest model delivers one positional point from each elephant every hour.
The technology of the new collars is not only intricate but also economical: To save expense, conserve battery power, and minimize weight, the collar mechanisms receive positional information from GPS satellites but then transmit that information by way of low-cost SMS (short message service) blurts on Safaricom, Kenya's leading cell phone network.
In other words, everybody in Kenya has a mobile phone, even the elephants.
A few Grevy's zebras are now also transmitting via Safaricom, and who knows what might be next—rock pythons, kori bustards, lilac-breasted rollers?
For the present what this means is that each of 20 elephants sends a text message to Douglas-Hamilton's computer, each hour of every day, saying: Iain, yo, here I am.
OF THE CARDINAL INCENTIVES that drive elephant behavior—that is, Douglas- Hamilton's three S's: sex, sustenance, and security—the most difficult to calibrate is the third.
Finding food, finding water, and finding reproductive opportunities aren't always simple tasks, but compared with finding security they are relatively straightforward.
Real security, lasting security, is more unpredictable and elusive.
The local people have a word for it: neebei.
Every person wants neebei—freedom from danger, menace, uncertainty, fear—and it's not anthropomorphism to say that every elephant does too.
Even in northern Kenya, even in the 21st century, with the ivory trade banned and the KWS policing against poachers, the life of an elephant (especially a bull with large tusks) can be precarious.
Sometimes an animal is killed by an angry farmer who has seen a crop wrecked, or by an outraged herder who has found a precious cow fatally gored and taken vengeance on the next elephant to appear.
Sometimes people still kill for ivory, blasting an elephant full of high-caliber slugs, hacking the face off to wrench out the tusks, moving that ivory into the black market.
And sometimes an elephant dies an untimely death for reasons that can't be discovered.
When I returned to Kenya for a second visit, after a month away, Douglas-Hamilton told me that Anne, the young female whose collar we inspected on foot, was dead.
She had been shot by persons unknown for reasons unknown.
Her tusks, smallish but valuable, hadn't been taken; they were still in place when a KWS patrol found the carcass, by which point they could be pulled from the rotting skull without the need to hack.
There was no trace of the perpetrator and no clue to the motive.
A week later I visited Anne's remains, this time with Onesmas Kahindi, the carcass- data man.
We found her (with help from Iain, who had flown over the last GPS position and caught a glimpse of white bone) in a soggy, spring-seep valley of western Laikipia, just upstream from a rectangular lake.
A cruising vulture lingered nearby, but there wasn't much left to interest it.
Anne's skull, resting beneath a yellow fever tree, was painted with bird dung.
Her lower jaw, several ribs, a shoulder blade, and other bone fragments lay scattered about, along with a smear of grassy stomach contents and a patch of dried skin.
Her jaw joints showed gnaw marks from a hyena.
The whole area reeked of death, but approaching downwind, we hadn't smelled her until we saw her.
She had been dead about three weeks.
The maggots and flies, like the hyenas, had already come and gone.
Kahindi measured a molar.
Anne had made her choices, and one choice brought her to this little valley, probably for its water and good grass.
Whatever else she found, she hadn't found neebei, but the details of her misfortune were inscrutable.
Kahindi, a tireless worker for elephant conservation but no sentimentalist, capped his pen.
Finished, he said.
OK, let's beat the rain.
IT'S ALL ABOUT CHOICES.
Elephants are smart, they know what they need, and they generally know where to get it; if they don't know, their mother or grandmother will teach them.
They seem to calculate risks.
They can be dangerous, but they prefer to avoid conflict with other big, dangerous creatures such as lions or people.
They are herbivores, after all, with no reasons to kill except defense, confusion, panic, and desperation when their needs are unmet.
In the Samburu-Laikipia ecosystem they manage to live in the spaces between human farms and settlements with far lower levels of conflict and higher levels of mutual tolerance than exist in most other areas where elephants range.
Douglas-Hamilton talked thoughtfully to me about such things, both before and after the day I nearly got him killed by an elephant.
It happened like this.
Late one afternoon, he stopped by my tent and asked:
Want to drive out and see some elephants before sunset?
He often rewarded himself that way for eight hours' deskbound effort.
On this occasion I said: How about a walk instead?
I knew that foot travel within the reserve was generally inadvisable, but couldn't we at least climb the little conical hill just behind camp?
Yes indeed, he said; and so we did.
From the hill's rocky top we savored a magnificent view westward, with the brown slick of the Ewaso Ngiro winding its way downstream between banks bristling with palm and acacia.
Just north of us was a larger hill, a double mound known as Sleeping Elephant.
Have you ever climbed that one? I asked.
No, said Douglas-Hamilton, with a mischievous glint in his eye … but we could.
Thus we set out on foot toward Sleeping Elephant: two middle-aged white men and a young Samburu from the camp crew, a skinny lad named Mwaniki, in his beads and his shuka, whom Douglas-Hamilton asked to tag along.
We walked only five minutes through the high, sparse bush before we saw elephants ahead: a female with two calves.
We paused, admiring them from a safe distance until they seemed to withdraw, and then we went on.
Seconds later Mwaniki muttered a warning, and we looked up to see the female glowering at us from 70 yards away.
Her ears were spread wide.
Trumpeting vehemently, she charged.
I turned and ran like a fool.
Mwaniki turned and ran like a gazelle.
Douglas-Hamilton turned and ran—then thought better of it, turned, threw his arms out, and hollered to stop her.
Sometimes this works; some elephants make bluff charges, or half-hearted ones, and can be halted by a gutsy challenge.
But this charge wasn't bluff.
The female honked again and kept coming.
Douglas-Hamilton turned again and ran.
By this time I had a 20-step lead and Mwaniki was gone.
At the rate he'd been moving, he might have been halfway to Lamu.
But no: He ran straight back into camp (we learned afterward) and shouted in Samburu: Etara lpayian ltome!
Meaning: The old man has been killed by an elephant!
This announcement, though premature, brought people back to the scene fast.
Meanwhile the elephant caught Douglas-Hamilton as he tried to evade her by circling a bush.
From 50 feet away I watched her lift him with her trunk and then toss him, as you'd toss dirt off a shovel.
He uttered a single piteous word: Help.
She stepped forward and stabbed her tusks downward.
Douglas-Hamilton's body was now obscured by tall grass, and I couldn't see whether she had nailed him.
Then she backed off about ten steps and paused.
This was the moment, he told me later, when he had time to wonder whether he would die.
I ran back to Douglas-Hamilton, and to my surprise, his innards weren't hanging out like ratatouille.
He was scratched, dazed, bruised, rumpled; his shoes, glasses, and watch were gone; but he was OK.
I felt all over his rib cage: no tusk holes.
Between us, we got him to his feet.
And then a dozen people arrived, running and driving from camp.
Someone found his glasses and shoes.
The watch was busted but ticking.
Quickly we vacated the area, lest the elephant change her mind and come back.
In the aftermath Douglas-Hamilton and I pieced together what had happened.
There was much relief, much apologizing (especially by me, for getting us out there on foot, but he wouldn't hear of that and claimed the blame himself), and much hypothesizing.
With help from Daballen and Lentipo, he established that this female must have been Diana, of the Royals, with her two youngish calves.
Maybe we startled her because the wind had been at her back; therefore she couldn't smell us before we got near.
Maybe she had been put on edge by a pushy bull, or a lion, just before we blundered along.
Is there anything in the records on Diana, he asked his people, that would suggest a recalcitrant disposition?
There was not.
Diana.
She was just another elephant: sensitive, volatile, and complex.
Her behavior that afternoon, though violent, had been nuanced.
At the last moment she made a choice.
She chose not to kill him.
And no one, not even Iain Douglas-Hamilton, with all his magical gadgetry and his hard-won knowledge, will ever know why.
On July 21, 2016, the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF), track and field's global governing body, barred Russia's team from competing in the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro because of a massive, secret government program of giving steroids to Russian athletes at the 2014 Sochi Olympics and covering up the evidence of cheating.
State- sponsored drug programs to give a country's athletes an unfair competitive edge date to the Cold War.
But individual athletes taking performance-enhancing drugs in pursuit of the Olympic ideal—Citius, Altius, Fortius (Faster, Higher, Stronger)—is as old as recorded history.
Above, Russia's gold medal winner Alexander Legkov jumps on the podium with Russia's silver medal winner Maxim Vylegzhanin, left, and Russia's bronze medal winner Ilia Chernousov, right, during the medal ceremony for the men's 50 km cross-country race at the 2014 Sochi Olympics.
All of these wins are suspect.
By the third century BC, ancient Greek Olympic athletes sought to enhance performance by using such stimulants as brandy, wine, hallucinogenic mushrooms, and sesame seeds.
Roman gladiators took stimulants to overcome fatigue and injury.
The ancients had also observed the effects of castration on domesticated animals and sought to emulate them.
The organs of animals and humans were ingested to improve strength, vitality, and bravery.
While cheating was severely punished in the early Olympics (one penalty was enslavement), enhancing performance by ingesting substances was not considered cheating.
Above, ancient Greek runners with torch.
With the advent of modern medicine in the 19th century, taking stimulants to enhance energy use, production, and recovery in sport competition grew in popularity.
Scientific experiments with the anabolic effects of hormones also began in earnest.
Charles-Édouard Brown-Sequard's Elixir of Life became the earliest known performance-enhancing drug in American professional sports, made famous when Jim Pud Galvin, a pitcher with the Pittsburgh Alleghenys, downed it before a game in 1889.
(That he won the game was taken as evidence of the elixir's power.)
The concoction consisted of testosterone drained from the gonads of dogs, rabbits, sheep, guinea pigs, and other animals.
Many such elixirs, said to embody the very essence of animal energy, were available at the time.
Above, a 1912 ad for a Brown-Sequard–type elixir called Sequarine.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, swimmers, distance runners, sprinters, and cyclists had begun using special doping recipes to gain a competitive edge against their opponents.
Boxers of the day swallowed strychnine tablets and mixtures of brandy and cocaine.
In the 1904 Olympic marathon, a faltering Thomas Hicks was administered two injections of sulphate of strychnine by his trainer during the race, chased down by large glasses of brandy.
Hicks took the gold but nearly died.
Mixtures of strychnine, heroin, cocaine, and caffeine were in use until the 1920s.
No attempt was made to conceal these practices—they weren't considered cheating—but doping recipes were closely guarded secrets.
Above, Thomas Hicks running the 1904 Summer Olympics in St. Louis, Missouri.
In the 19th century, pedestrianism—competitive walking—was all the rage.
Walking races stretched to 500 or more miles and attracted 20, 000 spectators a day.
In the 1870s and 1880s, endurance walking races were America's most popular spectator sport.
Stimulants were routinely used by endurance walkers to keep awake.
Long-distance cycling races soon followed.
Cyclists often took nitroglycerin, a cardiac stimulant, to improve their breathing.
Some used caffeine, others alcohol, and still others sugar cubes dipped in ether to gain an edge.
Above, grass track cycle racing in Pocklington, England, in the early 1900s.
Stimulant drug use steadily grew from the 19th to the mid-20th century.
In World War II, soldiers of both the Allies and Axis powers used amphetamines, says Charles E. Yesalis III, DSc, MPH.
Dr Yesalis, professor emeritus of health and human development at Pennsylvania State University and author of Anabolic Steroids in Sport and Exercise, has been a consultant to the US Office of National Drug Control Policy, the US Olympic Committee, and the National Collegiate Athletic Association, among others.