I wanted them so badly that I stayed back during gym class and transferred the sheet out of the classmate's backpack into mine.
When the students returned, my heart was racing.
Panicking that I would be found out, I thought up a preemptive lie.
I told the teacher that two teenagers had shown up on a motorbike, entered the classroom, rifled through backpacks, and left with the stickers.
As you might expect, this fib collapsed at the gentlest probing, and I reluctantly returned what I had pilfered.
My naive lying—I got better, trust me—was matched by my gullibility in sixth grade, when a friend told me that his family owned a flying capsule that could transport us anywhere in the world.
Preparing to travel on this craft, I asked my parents if they could pack me a few meals for the journey.
Even when my older brother snickered, I refused to disbelieve my friend‟s claim, and it was left to my friend's father to finally convince me that I'd been duped.
These lies that my friend and I told were nothing out of the ordinary for kids our age.
Like learning to walk and talk, lying is something of a developmental milestone.
While parents often find their children's lies troubling—for they signal the beginning of a loss of innocence—Kang Lee, a psychologist at the University of Toronto, sees the emergence of the behavior in toddlers as a reassuring sign that their cognitive growth is on track.
For the first few toys, the clue is obvious—a bark for a dog, a meow for a cat—and the children answer easily.
Then the sound played has nothing to do with the toy.
So you play Beethoven, but the toy's a car,” Lee explains.
The experimenter leaves the room on the pretext of taking a phone call—a lie for the sake of science—and asks the child not to peek at the toy.
Returning, the experimenter asks the child for the answer, following up with the question: Did you peek or not?
Lying for personal gain Frank Abagnale, Jr., is now a highly regarded security consultant, but his brazen deceptions earlier in life inspired the 2002 movie Catch Me if You Can.
Leonardo DiCaprio played Abagnale, who ran away from home at 16 and learned to survive by his wits, becoming a check forger, con man, and impostor.
I had to be creative in order to survive,” he says.
I do and will continue to regret it for the rest of my life.
Abagnale masqueraded as a pilot, a pediatrician, and an attorney with a Harvard law degree.
Most children can't resist peeking, Lee and his researchers have found by monitoring hidden cameras.
The percentage of the children who peek and then lie about it depends on their age.
Among two-year-old transgressors, only 30 percent are untruthful.
Among three- year-olds, 50 percent lie.
And by eight, about 80 percent claim they didn't peek.
Kids also get better at lying as they get older.
In guessing the toy that they secretly looked at, three- and four-year-olds typically blurt out the right answer, without realizing that this reveals their transgression and lying.
At seven or eight, kids learn to mask their lying by deliberately giving a wrong answer or trying to make their answer seem like a reasoned guess.
Five- and six-year-old kids fall in between.
In one study Lee used Barney the dinosaur as the toy.
A five-year-old girl who denied having looked at the toy, which was hidden under a cloth, told Lee she wanted to feel it before guessing.
So she puts her hand underneath the cloth, closes her eyes, and says, Ah, I know it's Barney,‟ Lee recounts.
I ask, Why?‟ She says, Because it feels purple.
What drives this increase in lying sophistication is the development of a child's ability to put himself or herself in someone else's shoes.
Known as theory of mind, this is the facility we acquire for understanding the beliefs, intentions, and knowledge of others.
Also fundamental to lying is the brain's executive function: the abilities required for planning, attention, and self-control.
The two-year-olds who lied in Lee's experiments performed better on tests of theory of mind and executive function than those who didn't.
Even at 16, kids who were proficient liars outperformed poor liars.
On the other hand, kids on the autism spectrum—known to be delayed in developing a robust theory of mind—are not very good at lying.
Lying for country Valerie Plame, a former CIA agent, worked undercover for two decades.
In 2003 her cover was blown and her clandestine career ended when Bush Administration officials leaked her name to a newspaper columnist.
She and her husband say it was done in retribution for his claim that the White House had exaggerated intelligence to justify the invasion of Iraq.
What lesson did she take away from her years as a spy?
Most people,” she says, are more than willing to talk about themselves.
On a recent morning, I took an Uber to visit Dan Ariely, a psychologist at Duke University and one of the world‟s foremost experts on lying.
The inside of the car, though neat, had a strong odor of sweaty socks, and the driver, though courteous, had trouble finding her way.
When we finally got there, she asked me smilingly if I would give her a five-star rating.
Sure,” I replied.
Later, I gave her three stars.
I assuaged my guilt by telling myself that it was better not to mislead thousands of Uber riders.
Ariely became fascinated with dishonesty about 15 years ago.
Looking through a magazine on a long-distance flight, he came across a mental aptitude test.
He answered the first question and flipped to the key in the back to see if he got it right.
He found himself taking a quick glance at the answer to the next question.
Continuing in this vein through the entire test, Ariely, not surprisingly, scored very well.
When I finished, I thought—I cheated myself,” he says.
Presumably, I wanted to know how smart I am, but I also wanted to prove I'm this smart to myself.
The experience led Ariely to develop a lifelong interest in the study of lying and other forms of dishonesty.
In experiments he and his colleagues have run on college campuses and elsewhere, volunteers are given a test with 20 simple math problems.
They must solve as many as they can in five minutes and are paid based on how many they get right.
They are told to drop the sheet into a shredder before reporting the number they solved correctly.
But the sheets don't actually get shredded.
A lot of volunteers lie, as it turns out.
On average, volunteers report having solved six matrices, when it was really more like four.
The results are similar across different cultures.
Most of us lie, but only a little.
The question Ariely finds interesting is not why so many lie, but rather why they don't lie a lot more.
Even when the amount of money offered for correct answers is raised significantly, the volunteers don't increase their level of cheating.
Here we give people a chance to steal lots of money, and people cheat only a little bit.
So something stops us— most of us—from not lying all the way,” Ariely says.
The reason, according to him, is that we want to see ourselves as honest, because we have, to some degree, internalized honesty as a value taught to us by society.
Which is why, unless one is a sociopath, most of us place limits on how much we are willing to lie.
How far most of us are willing to go—Ariely and others have shown—is determined by social norms arrived at through unspoken consensus, like the tacit acceptability of taking a few pencils home from the office supply cabinet.
Lying to entertain Apollo Robbins and Ava Do, who are married and business partners, use sleight of hand to entertain and educate.
Robbins is an astonishingly agile pickpocket, perhaps best known for emptying the pockets of some Secret Service agents on a presidential detail.
Do is a magician who has studied psychobiology.
We think of deception as the intent to distort someone's perception of reality,” they say.
It is an impartial tool that can be used for good or bad, to inform or mislead.
Patrick Couwenberg's staff and fellow judges in the Los Angeles County Superior Court believed he was an American hero.
By his account, he had been awarded a Purple Heart in Vietnam.
He'd participated in covert operations for the Central Intelligence Agency.
The judge boasted of an impressive educational background as well—an undergraduate degree in physics and a master's degree in psychology.
None of it was true.
When confronted, Couwenberg's defense was to blame a condition called pseudologia fantastica, a tendency to tell stories containing facts interwoven with fantasy.
The argument didn't save him from being removed from the bench in 2001.
There appears to be no agreement among psychiatrists about the relationship between mental health and lying, even though people with certain psychiatric disorders seem to exhibit specific lying behaviors.
Sociopathic individuals—those diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder—tend to tell manipulative lies, while narcissists may tell falsehoods to boost their image.
But is there anything unique about the brains of individuals who lie more than others?
In 2005 psychologist Yaling Yang and her colleagues compared the brain scans of three groups: 12 adults with a history of repeated lying, 16 who met the criteria for antisocial personality disorder but were not frequent liars, and 21 who were neither antisocial nor had a lying habit.
The researchers found that the liars had at least 20 percent more neural fibers by volume in their prefrontal cortices, suggesting that habitual liars have greater connectivity within their brains.
It's possible this predisposes them to lying because they can think up lies more readily than others, or it might be the result of repeated lying.
Lying for strategic advantage Raking in more than $32 million in tournament prizes, Daniel Negreanu has won more money than anyone in poker history.
The Canadian-born superstar, who moved to Las Vegas 20 years ago, has traveled the world as an ambassador of the game and appeared on countless televised shows.
If you want to win at poker,” he says, deception is absolutely necessary.
The trouble comes, he says, when players spend so much time deceiving competitors that it infiltrates their personal life.”
Psychologists Nobuhito Abe at Kyoto University and Joshua Greene at Harvard University scanned the brains of subjects using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and found that those who acted dishonestly showed greater activation in the nucleus accumbens—a structure in the basal forebrain that plays a key role in reward processing.
The more excited your reward system gets at the possibility of getting money—even in a perfectly honest context—the more likely you are to cheat,” explains Greene.
In other words, greed may increase one's predisposition to lying.
One lie can lead to another and another, as evidenced by the smooth, remorseless lying of serial con men such as Hogue.
An experiment by Tali Sharot, a neuroscientist at University College London, and colleagues showed how the brain becomes inured to the stress or emotional discomfort that happens when we lie, making it easier to tell the next fib.
In the fMRI scans of the participants, the team focused on the amygdala, a region that is involved in processing emotions.
The researchers found that the amygdala's response to lies got progressively weaker with each lie, even as the lies got bigger.
Perhaps engaging in small acts of deception can lead to bigger acts of deception,” she says.
Lying to tell stories Some of the Internet's most viral videos and photographs have been staged by a secretive artist known as Zardulu, who rarely reveals the fabrications.
Like all myths,” Zardulu says, mine are established to engender a sense of wonder about the world, to counter our perceived mastery and understanding of it.
Zardulu appears wearing a ram's head, symbolizing a journey into the unconscious mind, while the hierophant, an interpreter of mysteries, represents the shadow self.
Much of the knowledge we use to navigate the world comes from what others have told us.
Without the implicit trust that we place in human communication, we would be paralyzed as individuals and cease to have social relationships.
We get so much from believing, and there's relatively little harm when we occasionally get duped,” says Tim Levine, a psychologist at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, who calls this idea the truth default theory.
Being hardwired to be trusting makes us intrinsically gullible.
If you say to someone, I am a pilot,‟ they are not sitting there thinking: Maybe he's not a pilot.
Why would he say he's a pilot?
‟They don't think that way,” says Frank Abagnale, Jr., a security consultant whose cons as a young man, including forging checks and impersonating an airline pilot, inspired the 2002 movie Catch Me if You Can.
This is why scams work, because when the phone rings and the caller ID says it's the Internal Revenue Service, people automatically believe it is the IRS.
They don't realize that someone could manipulate the caller ID.
Robert Feldman, a psychologist at the University of Massachusetts, calls that the liar's advantage.
People are not expecting lies, people are not searching for lies,” he says, and a lot of the time, people want to hear what they are hearing.
We put up little resistance to the deceptions that please us and comfort us—be it false praise or the promise of impossibly high investment returns.
When we are fed falsehoods by people who have wealth, power, and status, they appear to be even easier to swallow, as evidenced by the media's credulous reporting of Lochte's robbery claim, which unraveled shortly thereafter.
Researchers have shown that we are especially prone to accepting lies that affirm our worldview.
Memes that claim Obama was not born in the United States, deny climate change, accuse the U. S. government of masterminding the terrorist strikes of September 11, 2001, and spread other alternative facts,” as a Trump adviser called his Inauguration crowd claims, have thrived on the Internet and social media because of this vulnerability.
Debunking them does not demolish their power, because people assess the evidence presented to them through a framework of preexisting beliefs and prejudices, says George Lakoff, a cognitive linguist at the University of California, Berkeley.
If a fact comes in that doesn't fit into your frame, you'll either not notice it, or ignore it, or ridicule it, or be puzzled by it—or attack it if it's threatening.
Lying for professional gain Jayson Blair is a life coach, seeking to help people define and achieve their goals.
Before that, he was a fast-rising New York Times reporter whose career imploded in 2003 when he was discovered to have fabricated and plagiarized material in dozens of articles.
My world went from one in which I covered the deception of others to being the one doing the deception,” he says, and eventually, searching for answers to questions about why I lied and why others do so as well.
A recent study led by Briony Swire-Thompson, a doctoral candidate in cognitive psychology at the University of Western Australia, documents the ineffectiveness of evidence-based information in refuting incorrect beliefs.
In 2015 Swire-Thompson and her colleagues presented about 2, 000 adult Americans with one of two statements: Vaccines cause autism” or Donald Trump said that vaccines cause autism.”
(Trump has repeatedly suggested there's a link, despite the lack of scientific evidence for it. )
Not surprisingly, participants who were Trump supporters showed a decidedly stronger belief in the misinformation when it had Trump's name attached to it.
Afterward the participants were given a short explanation—citing a large-scale study—for why the vaccine-autism link was false, and they were asked to reevaluate their belief in it.
The participants—across the political spectrum—now accepted that the statements claiming the link were untrue, but testing them again a week later showed that their belief in the misinformation had bounced back to nearly the same level.
Other studies have shown that evidence undermining lies may in fact strengthen belief in them.
People are likely to think that familiar information is true.
So any time you retract it, you run the risk of making it more familiar, which makes that retraction actually less effective, ironically, over the long term,” says Swire-Thompson.
I experienced this phenomenon firsthand not long after I spoke to Swire-Thompson.
When a friend sent me a link to an article ranking the 10 most corrupt political parties in the world, I promptly posted it to a WhatsApp group of about a hundred high school friends from India.
The reason for my enthusiasm was that the fourth spot in the ranking was held by India's Congress Party, which in recent decades has been implicated in numerous corruption scandals.
I chortled with glee because I'm not a fan of the party.
But shortly after sharing the article, I discovered that the ranking, which included parties from Russia, Pakistan, China, and Uganda, wasn't based on any metrics.
It had been done by a site called BBC Newspoint, which sounded like a credible source.
But I found out that it had no connection to the British Broadcasting Corporation.
I posted an apology to the group, noting that the article was in all likelihood fake news.
That didn't stop others from reposting the article to the group several times over the next day.
I realized that the correction I'd posted had not had any effect.
Many of my friends— because they shared my antipathy toward the Congress Party—were convinced the ranking was true, and every time they shared it, they were unwittingly, or perhaps knowingly, nudging it toward legitimacy.
Countering it with fact would be in vain.
What then might be the best way to impede the fleet-footed advance of untruths into our collective lives?
The answer isn't clear.
Technology has opened up a new frontier for deceit, adding a 21st-century twist to the age-old conflict between our lying and trusting selves.
As the frozen ground warms much faster than expected, it’s reshaping the landscape —and releasing carbon gases that fuel global warming.
The Batagaika crater in eastern Siberia, half a mile wide and growing, is the largest of many across the Arctic.
As permafrost laced with buried ice thaws, the ground collapses, forming craters or lakes.
The elder Zimov first figured out that permafrost stores far more carbon than scientists once thought.
Some of it is now escaping as temperatures rise.
S E R G E Y Z I M O V , A N ecologist by training, tossed a woolly mammoth bone on the pile.
He was squatting in mud along the cool, wide Kolyma River, below a towering cliff of crumbling earth.
It was summer in eastern Siberia, far above the Arctic Circle, in that part of Russia that’s closer to Alaska than to Moscow.
There wasn’t a speck of frost or snow in sight.
Yet at this cliff, called Duvanny Yar, the Kolyma had chewed through and exposed what lies beneath: a layer of frozen ground, or permafrost, that is hundreds of feet deep—and warming fast.
Twigs, other plant matter, and Ice Age animal parts—bison jaws, horse femurs, mammoth bones—spilled onto a beach that sucked at Zimov’s boots.
I love Duvanny Yar,” he said as he yanked fossils from the muck.
It is like a book.
Each page is a story about the history of nature.
Across nine million square miles at the top of the planet, climate change is writing a new chapter.
Arctic permafrost isn’t thawing gradually, as scientists once predicted.
Geologically speaking, it’s thawing almost overnight.
As soils like the ones at Duvanny Yar soften and slump, they’re releasing vestiges of ancient life—and masses of carbon—that have been locked in frozen dirt for millennia.
Entering the atmosphere as methane or carbon dioxide, the carbon promises to accelerate climate change, even as humans struggle to curb our fossil fuel emissions.
Few understand this threat better than Zimov.
From a ramshackle research station in the gold-mining outpost of Cherskiy, about three hours by speedboat from Duvanny Yar, he has spent decades unearthing the mysteries of a warming Arctic.
Along the way, he has helped upend conventional wisdom—especially the notion that the far north, back in the Pleistocene ice ages, had been an unbroken desert of ice and thin soils dotted with sage.
Instead, the abundant fossils of mammoths and other large grazers at Duvanny Yar and other sites told Zimov that Siberia, Alaska, and western Canada had been fertile grasslands, rich with herbs and willows.
As these plants and animals died, the cold slowed their decomposition.
Over time, windblown silt buried them deep, locking them in permafrost.
The upshot is that Arctic permafrost is much richer in carbon than scientists once thought.
Now new discoveries suggest that the carbon will escape faster as the planet warms.
From the unexpected speed of Arctic warming and the troubling ways that meltwater moves through polar landscapes, researchers now suspect that for every one degree Celsius rise in Earth’s average temperature, permafrost may release the equivalent of four to six years’ worth of coal, oil, and natural gas emissions— double to triple what scientists thought a few years ago.
Within a few decades, if we don’t curb fossil fuel use, permafrost could be as big a source of greenhouse gases as China, the world’s largest emitter, is today.
We aren’t accounting for that.
The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has only recently started incorporating permafrost into its projections.
It still underestimates just how wide Pandora’s freezer could swing open—and how much havoc that could unleash.
Permafrost’s potential to warm the planet is dwarfed by our own.
But if we hope to limit warming to two degrees Celsius, as 195 nations agreed to during the 2015 Paris talks, new research suggests we may have to cut emissions eight years sooner than IPCC models project, just to account for the thawing that will be going on.
It is perhaps our least appreciated reason to hasten a transition to cleaner energy: To reach whatever goal we set to combat warming, we’ll need to move even faster than we think.
Zimov first came to Cherskiy in the 1970s as a college student to help with mapping on an expedition.
He loved the stark landscape and isolation and remoteness from Soviet power centers.
The dark winters promised time to think.
He returned a few years later and founded the Northeast Science Station, at first under the auspices of the Russian Academy of Sciences.
Today he owns and runs it with his son, Nikita.
It’s an improvisational operation run on a shoestring and on secondhand equipment.
But the station attracts Arctic scientists from around the world.
One day in the summer of 2018, photographer Katie Orlinsky and I joined Zimov in an aging boat to ferry supplies to a carbon-monitoring facility at Ambarchik Bay, near the mouth of the Kolyma on the Arctic Ocean.
The site had originally been occupied by a transit station for prisoners bound for Stalin’s gulags, and Soviet-era relics were everywhere.
We traversed spongy grasses across a walkway fashioned from a string of old steam radiators.
Zimov, bull chested, his long white hair tucked in a beret, probed the ground with a metal shaft as he walked.
He’s been doing that a lot lately, to check the depth of the hard permafrost.
Permafrost—ground that remains frozen year-round—is capped by a few feet of dirt and plant detritus.
Called the active layer, this soil normally thaws each summer and refreezes in winter, protecting permafrost from rising heat above.
But in the spring of 2018, a crew working for Nikita found that dirt near the surface around Cherskiy had not iced up at all during the long dark polar night.
That was unheard of: January in Siberia is so brutally cold that human breath can freeze with a tinkling sound that the indigenous Yakuts call the whisper of stars.
The Soviets used to land heavy planes on the Kolyma.
Soil 30 inches down should have been frozen.
Instead it was mush.
Three years ago, the temperature in the ground above our permafrost was minus 3 degrees Celsius [27 degrees Fahrenheit],” Sergey Zimov said. Then it was minus 2. Then it was minus one.
This year, the temperature was plus 2 degrees.
On one level that’s not surprising.
Earth’s five warmest years since the late 19th century have come since 2014, and the Arctic is warming more than twice as fast as the rest of the planet, as it loses the sea ice that helps chill it.
In 2017 tundra in Greenland faced its worst known wildfire.
Days before we landed in Siberia, thermometers in Lakselv, Norway, 240 miles above the Arctic Circle, recorded a blistering 32 degrees Celsius, or 90 degrees Fahrenheit.
Arctic reindeer hid in road tunnels for relief.
Permafrost temperatures globally have been rising for half a century.
On Alaska’s North Slope, they spiked 11 degrees Fahrenheit in 30 years.
Localized thawing of permafrost, especially in villages where development disturbs the surface and allows heat to penetrate, has eroded shorelines, undermined roads and schools, cracked pipelines, and collapsed ice cellars where Arctic hunters store walrus meat and bowhead whale blubber.
What the Zimovs were documenting in 2018, though, was something different, with implications beyond the Arctic: a wintertime thaw.
The culprit, paradoxically, was heavy snow.
Siberia is dry, but for several winters before 2018, thick snow had smothered the region.
The snow acted like a blanket, trapping summer heat in the soil.