Its populations have increased significantly, and both of its subspecies are legally hunted in four countries.
And in fact, in some parts of Africa giraffes are doing fine.
In South Africa and Namibia, where private game farms boost wildlife numbers and giraffes are hunted legally, populations have nearly doubled in recent decades.
But in East Africa, the reticulated and Masai species of giraffe face a much grimmer outlook.
What’s killing giraffes in southern Kenya is fences.
They’re an even bigger threat than poaching.
Giraffes can’t jump over fences, which means their ranges are being fragmented, says Arthur Muneza, the East Africa coordinator of the GCF.
Population growth, livestock overgrazing, and climate change are pushing pastoralists and farmers into wildlands and giraffe habitat.
Meanwhile the population of Nubian giraffes, found mostly in Uganda, has declined by as much as 97 percent over the past 30 years, making them one of the world’s most critically endangered large mammals.
The giraffes of Niger are scarcer still, and yet, from a low point of just 49 individuals in 1996, the population of West African giraffes has bounced back to more than 600 in the past two and a half decades.
Their return is one of the greatest conservation success stories on the continent.
It is also one of the most unlikely.
Niger ranks dead last out of 189 countries on the UN’s Human Development Index— a measure of life expectancy, schooling, and national income—and conserving wildlife had not traditionally been a priority of the country.
In 1996, after a coup d’etat, the new president of Niger, Ibrahim Baré Maïnassara, sent the army into the bush to capture a group of animals to present as gifts to the presidents of nearby Nigeria and Burkina Faso.
Not a single captured giraffe survived the operation, and the population of West African giraffes fell by nearly a third.
Three years later, two more animals died when the next president tried to send a gift to the leader of Togo.
The dire situation, and the recognition that the last West African giraffes were a precious and rare wildlife resource in a country that has few others, led Niger in 2011 to craft the first national conservation strategy in Africa for protecting giraffes.
With poaching all but quashed by the government and without any natural predators, the population of giraffes in Koure has been able to grow.
As the population exploded at a rate of more than 11 percent a year, conflict with farmers and herders seemed inevitable.
A day earlier I’d gone to the nearby village of Kanaré to speak with the local chief, Hamadou Yacouba.
Sitting under the bushy canopy of a neem tree to shade us from the midday sun, he explained that giraffes are considered like domesticated animals here.
God placed the giraffes here, so we live with them.
Kanaré has benefited from a bit of giraffe tourism and a local development fund created by international conservationists.
But with Boko Haram active in the country’s east and al Qaeda affiliates operating in the country’s north and west, tourism has slowed to a trickle.
The giraffes were visited by just 1, 700 tourists last year, mostly well-to-do Niamey residents on day-trips.
There has been a remarkable rewilding of Africa during the past decade as conservationists have reintroduced long-departed species, such as Chad’s scimitar- horned oryx, to areas that once were part of their home ranges.
In the past two years the GCF has orchestrated three other giraffe translocations, including two inside Uganda’s Murchison Falls National Park, which required ferrying animals across the Nile River.
In Niger, an assessment of the country’s potential habitats determined the safest place to park a second population of West African giraffes was on 2.
5 million uninhabited acres in Gadabedji, an area in the center of the country that has been designated as a biosphere reserve.
It’s a hot spot for vultures and gazelles, and 50 years ago the area was host to ancestors of these giraffes as well.
Moving Giraffes Across the Nile Wildlife officials load three Rothschild’s giraffes into a truck lined with leafy branches for the animals to snack on during their journey to a new part of Uganda’s Murchison Falls National Park.
The trio was part of a project that relocated 19 of the endangered giraffes.
A truck loaded with giraffes is ferried across the Nile.
The animals were moved from a section of Murchison Falls National Park on the north side of the Nile, where giraffes are threatened by poachers and the effects of oil extraction, to a remote southern sector.
Three Rothschild’s giraffes are released in Murchison Falls National Park on the southern side of the Nile, where conservationists hope their numbers will grow.
Since giraffes can’t swim, they won’t cross the river and return to their previous habitat.
The translocation is not without critics.
If giraffes are in danger in their present location, why are their numbers augmenting?
It simply doesn’t make sense, says Isabelle Ciofolo, an ethologist who joined the local conservation efforts in Koure in the mid-1990s.
To the extent possible, it is best to leave the giraffes to their own natural tendencies in determining which habitat is suited to their needs.
She points out that the giraffes of Niger have shown they can roam up to 180 miles.
If there is a menace in one place, they are perfectly capable of finding a new habitat on their own.
Good girl.
What a sweetie pie, Morkel whispers to himself as he creeps closer to the unsuspecting giraffe.
He estimates the animal at about 1, 500 pounds, sets the pressure in his rifle to 12 bar for a 100-foot shot, and turns the safety off.
It’s 1 p. m. , and the temperature has just hit 100°F.
I’ve never had this sort of situation where you can walk right up to a giraffe.
Normally, you’re in a pickup, shooting them from a distance, Morkel tells me.
But these are strange creatures, not least because they live on community land, far from any game reserve or national park, and spend their days crossing paths with farmers and herders.
At night they bust their heads through the walls of the locals’ elevated beehive-shaped granaries and eat the cowpea leaves that villagers store for their livestock, as well as their mangoes and pumpkins.
Fortunately for everyone, the one food they mysteriously have no taste for is millet, the nutritious local cereal staple.
Wildlife personnel pull a dead giraffe from a poacher’s snare in Amboseli, Kenya.
A single animal can yield 650 pounds of valuable meat.
Sometimes giraffes are killed only for their tails—status symbols in some cultures.
Morkel raises the gun to his shoulder and pulls the trigger, sending his etorphine- laden dart sailing into the animal’s left shoulder, a direct hit, but it will take several minutes for the drug to kick in.
The sedation of wild giraffes is a relatively new practice that has been refined over the past 30 years and carries major risks.
The animal can stop breathing from a lethal dose of opioid.
It can fall headfirst and crack its skull, or break its long back or spindly legs.
It can regurgitate partly digested food and inhale it into its lungs, leading to pneumonia.
And it can overheat while lying on the scorching sand.
During a 2017 translocation in Uganda, three animals died from stresses related to being captured, and another died while it was being moved.
While we wait for the drug to kick in, Morkel and I walk back to a waiting pickup truck filled with a team of rangers and researchers.
This is a hard species to work with, Morkel says.
There’s a long way to fall, and a lot of unique anatomy.
Everything about this creature’s anatomy indeed seems to be uniquely stretched to the extreme.
There’s its famous neck, of course, but also its outrageously long eyelashes, its legs (the longest of any animal), its eyes (the widest of any land mammal), its elongated skull, and especially its purple-black prehensile tongue, which can extend over a foot and a half from its mouth and nimbly strip bare an acacia stem so thorny you wouldn’t want to grab it with your bare hand.
Even its heart, which pumps blood over a greater vertical span than any other land mammal, can be more than two feet long, with ventricle walls more than three inches thick.
Kenyan wildlife experts approach a reticulated giraffe that has been tranquilized in the Loisaba Wildlife Conservancy.
They’ll attach a GPS unit to one of its ossicones—the bony knobs on its head—so scientists can follow it, part of a plan to track 250 giraffes in key parts of Africa to better understand how much space giraffes need.
The giraffe has the highest known blood pressure of any animal, and yet somehow it can manage to quickly drop its head 16 or 17 feet to the ground without passing out.
Because it’s so difficult for them to get up and down, and because they’re so vulnerable when they’re on the ground, giraffes only seem to sleep for a few minutes at a time (a phenomenon difficult to observe in the wild).
They can go for weeks without water by hydrating only with the moisture they suck from leaves.
It took five years of observing giraffes in the deserts of Namibia before the GCF’s Fennessy, perhaps the world’s leading expert on giraffes, ever saw one splay its legs and dip its head awkwardly to drink from a ground puddle.
Witnessing this gawky effort to obtain the most basic sustenance makes one wonder if the right question to ask isn’t why the giraffe has such a long neck, but rather, why is it so short relative to such long legs?
In truth we still don’t know why the giraffe has such a long neck.
According to Nikos Soulounias, an evolutionary biologist at the New York Institute of Technology, the giraffe evolved on the Indian subcontinent and migrated to Africa from Asia some eight million years ago.
Its closest living relative, the okapi, which lives in the equatorial rainforests of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, noticeably lacks its cousin’s long neck.
Giraffes are naturally topiarists, eating the acacias into hourglass profiles that fan up at the top, just above the browse line where the animals’ towering necks and outstretched tongues can no longer reach, and so it would make sense that the long neck evolved to open up a feeding niche unavailable to shorter species.
But some researchers have suggested that the giraffe’s long neck is actually a function of sexual selection.
Its principal benefit is not for foraging in the upper reaches of trees but rather for males to more effectively club each other with their pendulous heads, outfitted with extra-thick skulls, when competing for females in heat.
Or perhaps the giraffe’s long neck is simply to give an otherwise fairly defenseless animal a high vantage point to watch the horizon for predators.
Undoubtedly linked to the giraffe’s long neck is its eerie silence.
Giraffes almost never make a sound and don’t communicate with each other using any kind of signaling audible to human ears.
Their silence is especially bizarre given that they’re social creatures that live in a fission-fusion society, in which groups of individuals frequently get together for a period of time before dissolving.
Other species with fission-fusion societies, such as elephants and chimpanzees, tend to be loquacious communicators.
This has led some researchers to suggest that giraffes may emit low- frequency infrasound to communicate with each other over long distances (similar to the low-frequency rumblings of elephants), but so far the evidence has been mixed.
Workers load a West African giraffe into a trailer.
Later it will be moved 500 miles to Niger’s northeast Gadabedji Biosphere Reserve to help grow a new population of the subspecies, which has about 600 animals.
After two minutes of standing still, the giraffe that Morkel has darted appears to realize how weird she’s starting to feel.
Suddenly she gallops off from the group, her long legs seeming to fly in slow motion.
Our truck sets off after her, weaving through the tiger brush at 20 miles an hour, as the driver tries to keep up with the sprinting animal.
Finally we’re able to shoot out in front of the giraffe to cut her off.
The tires screech to a halt so that four men in the bed can leap out and set up a rope line to slow the animal.
As the giraffe barrels straight into the line, the head local researcher, Abdoul Razack Moussa Zaberiou, is sent flying through the air while the giraffe tumbles to the ground in a cloud of dust.
Morkel jumps on top of the downed giraffe just below her head and plunges a syringe full of antidote into a jugular vein, while two rangers straddle the lower part of her neck to keep her pinned.
They only have about two minutes until the animal comes to her senses, and so the team hustles to stuff her ears with a rag and put a blindfold over her eyes.
While Morkel lets fly a string of expletives, the team of vets and rangers take blood samples and inject syringefuls of vitamin E, antibiotics, and an anti-inflammatory drug.
They take the giraffe’s temperature and measurements and cut off an ear tip for later DNA testing.
No sooner have they wrapped a rope around her torso than the animal awakens and kicks wildly, spraying peach-colored sand into the air.
Morkel delivers a slap on her rear end and she shoots up, blind and deaf, to be guided by a rope into the back of a trailer, in which she’ll be driven to a large enclosure made of eucalyptus poles and thatching.
Five more giraffes are standing by, intently observing from their perch high above us, not 30 yards away.
Two of them chew their cud, rolling a bolus between their teeth.
Farther in the distance a pair of young Zarma herders, with their flock of goats, lean against a tree, watching as well.
The whole frenzied chase has the feeling of a mobster hit gone awry, or perhaps an alien abduction.
In Chad’s Zakouma National Park, Kordofan giraffes rub necks—possibly a prelude to fighting or some other form of communication among the mostly silent animals.
Zakouma is a relatively safe haven for Kordofans; more than half the world’s population is there.
After three weeks getting accustomed to life in an enclosure, the giraffes that will recolonize Gadabedji are ready for transport.
At about 11 a. m. on a Sunday, the first four giraffes are guided into a 20-foot shipping container that has been painted white and had its roof cut off.
The floor is packed with wet sand for the animals to stand on and has poles fastened all along the edges to hang leaves as an in-transit snack.
It’s crucial that the giraffes stay calm during the trip.
Weeks earlier the team lost an overexcited animal that slipped and knocked its head against the trailer and later died.
Led by a spotter vehicle that looks out for electrical wires that could decapitate the precious cargo, the truck sets off at a 10-mile-an-hour crawl for Gadabedji, some 500 miles away.
Four curious giraffe heads poking above the trailer watch a parade of sights they’ve never encountered before: men getting haircuts by the side of the road, butchered goats hanging from poles, and small white mosques overflowing with prostrate men.
We drive past a camel-driving Tuareg herder, a cattle market filled with mangy long- horned bulls, women in hijabs who smile and point, and quite a few people who don’t even look up to notice the strangest cargo ever to blow through their village.
A Kenyan student models a mask during a visit to her school by the Twiga Walinzi—Giraffe Guards—a conservation team whose work includes teaching pupils about giraffes in hopes the children will help protect the species.
Forty-seven hours later, having stopped only for twice-a-day feeds beneath gao trees and a three-hour nap for the crew, we finally arrive at Gadabedji, where we’re greeted by the Tuareg mayor in a bright red robe and turban.
It’s a sandy landscape, with little grass or brush.
Children run out to meet our caravan, raising their arms and jumping for joy.
They have heard for months that we are coming.
This is perfect country for a giraffe, Morkel tells me, smiling.
The heads peeking over the side of the shipping container look around at the clear expanse and pockets of edible acacias.
Yes, this is indeed good giraffe country.
As Tuareg guards stand by with AK-47s, the gates of the shipping container are opened.
Under a blazing sun, a daytime moon, and a sky of wispy cirrus clouds, the giraffes have arrived at their new home.
This is just the first cohort of the founding population.
There are plans for more animals to join them next year.
And the year after, possibly more.
After two minutes the first giraffe pokes her head forward and cautiously trots out.
She is soon followed by the others.
They stop to watch the humans watching them.
A breeze blows by, and the four turn and wander off slowly, marching toward a stand of acacias at the horizon.
They move single file, looking back now and again as if unsure what they’re supposed to do next, until they are out of sight.
Our writers pick 10 great trails Cranbrook-Sissinghurst, Kent Start/finish Cranbrook Distance/time 10 miles/5 hours. Refuel The Three Chimneys, Biddenden Unless a man understands the Weald, he cannot easily write about the beginnings of England, ” Hilaire Belloc noted early in the last century, admiring all that roll of land which lies held between and above the chalk of south-eastern England” and that crosses Sussex, Kent, Surrey, Hampshire.
The point at which the High Weald arcs into Kent is to my eye the English landscape at its most sublime – a stretch of ancient woodland and oast housed-prettiness, where the combination of earth scent and leaf shade seems to suggest that here the land sits at its deepest.
Every season brings its own particular joy for walkers, but the winter months hold the landscape’s subtlest pleasures: goldcrests, linnets and hawfinches; frosted hazel and hornbeam; the red hips of the wild dog rose.
The paths are clay, and soft underfoot, which makes for occasionally muddy though always pleasurable walking.
Head out from St Dunstan’s Church in Cranbrook. Known as the Cathedral of the Weald, the church is more than 500 years old, and the depictions of the pagan Green Man, in both wooden shields and a porch stone carving, nod to the time when the surrounding area was covered by dense forest.
From here you head northwards, away from the town and the main road and out into woodland.
There is an intimacy to the landscape here, in part due to the patchwork of small, oddly shaped fields, a remnant of medieval times when the land was first cleared for farming: the hedgerows you pass today evolved out of the strips of woodland – or shaws” – that once divided them.
This particular walk is long, though easy to abbreviate, and guides you through some of the county’s agricultural history – past fruit orchards, hopper huts that housed workers from London during the picking season, former millponds, and clothiers’ houses.
At one point you will spill out on to the intriguingly named Digdog Lane — so-called for the stray dogs that would dig up plague victims buried in the land nearby.
The Three Chimneys pub, Biddenden.
Over the course of 30 years, the couple transformed the one-time farmstead into one of the most revered gardens in England.
Winter, when Sackville-West’s exuberant planting stands in relief, is a fine moment to relish the formality of Nicolson’s garden design: the series of garden rooms and immaculate hedges, the long walk of pleached limes.
From the castle you may turn towards Sissinghurst itself, a handsome village built on the wealth of the Wealden iron and cloth industries, and then back to Cranbrook.
Or head east towards the Three Chimneys, an oak-beamed and open-fired freehouse, winner of the Good Pub Guide’s county dining award, and a fine place to sample Kentish ale.
Laura Barton, journalist and author of Twenty-One Locks Beinn Eighe Mountain Trail, Wester Ross Stupendous views of Beinn Eighe.
Setting out from the luscious banks of Loch Maree, this walk climbs through pine woods to an icy quartzite plateau with stupendous mountain views.
The ascent is hard work, but the steepness makes it special.
In few other places can walkers cross so many habitats, or seem to see so many seasons, quite this quickly.
The ascent is up a well-marked but extremely rugged path that’s unalleviated by flat ground (a free guide to the route can be picked up in the car park).
It’s worth taking this route up Coille na Glas Leitir (the Wood of the Grey Slope) slowly, because there’s an extraordinary amount to see.
The pines on the lower slopes accommodate rich communities of mosses and liverworts.
Look out for pine martens and woodland birds.
Soon, these tall trees give way to stunted rowans and the bird-life becomes sparse.
But an eagle – white-tailed or golden – might drift above.
Climb higher, and things get stranger.
Look for polygonal patterns of frost heave underfoot, and spiny prostrate junipers that cower in fissures in the rock.
You might spot flurries of snow buntings, and even orange liverwort (the species is found in only four known sites; the other three are in Norway).
The greatest appeal of this walk, however, is the scale of the view as you breach the plateau.
This is the kind of scene that you can only usually get from the highest peaks (which would require crampons and ice axe); catch it on a cold, clear day and these mountains will be etched in your memory for ever.
From the plateau you could take a different route back down the same slope, but there are many alternatives to extend the walk.
Whatever you choose, warm up at the Kinlochewe Hotel afterwards.
It has rooms, a bunkhouse, hearty dishes and whisky, including Octomore (an intense peat hit) and the full range of Old Pulteneys (for warming sweetness on any budget).
You can also take a look at Beinn Eighe: the Saw-Toothed Mountain, Dick Balbarry and J Laughton’s book outlining the rich history of the slopes you’ve just climbed.
Check weather conditions and mountain guide advice, scotlandinfo.eu David Gange, author of The Frayed Atlantic Edge: A Historian’s Journey from Shetland to the Channel Chelmorton, Peak District Stone rows … the distinctive drystone walls of Chelmorton.
Winter sees the Peak District at its bleakest, but as vegetation disappears and pasture is stripped of wildlife, the landscape gives up clues to its history.
The linear village of Chelmorton is famous for its distinctive pattern of drystone walls, which delineate thin strips of land said to predate the enclosure acts.
From Main Street, the hill of Chelmorton Low, topped by two prehistoric tumuli, looms over the village.
At its foot is St John the Baptist, said to be the highest church in Derbyshire, where a golden locust weather vane glints atop the spire.
The road ends at Bank Pit Spring where Illy Willy Water cascades into an underground stream.
The uphill path runs through the remains of a rake, a mined vertical vein of lead.
Some of the undulating grassy mounds in the fields are old mine workings.
The industrial is never far away in the Peak District.
At the top, it is worth taking a short detour along the concessionary path to Five Wells cairn, one of the UK’s highest megalithic burial chambers, with fine views across Taddington Moor.
There are many ancient tombs on the hills around Chelmorton, most of them excavated (or desecrated, depending on your point of view) by Victorian antiquarians.
Back on the bridleway, tramp through the fields until you meet the Limestone Way, the long- distance footpath through the White Peak plateau.
Head towards the village of Flagg, whose Elizabethan manor was once renowned for its haunted” skull, which repelled all attempts to give it a decent burial.
The final leg, crossing fields on signposted footpaths, leads to a junction known as Chelmorton Thorn, a reminder of the old tradition of planting hawthorn bushes at crossroads and other liminal places.
From here, it drops back down into Chelmorton and the 18th-century Church Inn, with its excellent food and an open fire that keeps temperatures inside close to Snow shoes … a hiker descending Meall a’Bhuachaille.
Photograph: Alamy Start/finish Glenmore Forest visitor centre Distance/time 5. miles/4 hours Refuel The Pine Marten Bar, Glenmore
For a journey into winter wonderland, the circular walk up Meall a’Bhuachaille (the Shepherd’s Hill) takes some beating.
Stunning views, rare wildlife and native woodland regeneration: think of this walk as a whisky; the Cairngorms distilled into pure, rich form.
Climbing this peak, I always experience that joyous release of body” that Nan Shepherd terms feyness.
From the visitor centre, follow a track uphill through the forest.
Keep your eyes peeled for red squirrels, roe deer and pine martens.
Deer are carefully managed to enable pine, birch and willow trees to self-seed and grow up the hill.
Among the new seedlings, regal old granny pines stand tall.
When the sun reflects off the snow, the crowns of these 100-year-old survivors glow a wonderful warm copper colour.
Gaining the ridge, continue uphill to the bulky granite cairn.
At 810 metres high, there are excellent views across Glenmore Forest, the Cairngorms plateau, the Moray Firth and – on an exceptionally clear day – Ben Nevis.
It can be very cold and windy, so lunch is best saved for the shelter of Ryvoan bothy; then turn right along the Thieves Road, an old drovers’ route that was also used by fearsome cateran (cattle raiders).
The track leads into a dramatic glacial valley: meltwater once poured through this channel; now the steep sides are lined with regenerating Caledonian forest.
Leave the track for a moment to visit Lochan Uaine (the Green Lochan).
The water is a distinctive turquoise because fairies wash their clothes here (although the wee people must struggle in winter, because the lochan is often frozen).
Turn right on a smaller path that soon winds uphill through beautiful old Scots pines with views to the Northern Corries.
A gentle descent on forest track leads back to your starting point.
Call into the Reindeer Centre to see if Rudolph is at home.
Finish up in the cosy wood- panelled Pine Marten Bar for a taste of Cairngorm après ski.
Keeper’s Pond, on Blorenge’s north-east face.
Pick up an almond croissant from the town’s Angel Bakery.
You’ll need energy, because after a gentle (pre)amble past the castle, along the River Usk and then under the Monmouthshire and Brecon canal using a low, vaulted, dripping foot tunnel, you start the steep ascent of the Blorenge.
The climb follows the route of Hill’s Tramroad, built in the 1820s to transport pig iron and limestone to the canal, a reminder of the area’s rich industrial heritage.
Luckily, the stone sleepers are still there to provide steps.
Two-thirds of the way up, turn left and follow the mercifully flatter path along the Cwm Craf, a hollow on Blorenge’s north-east face, past Keeper’s Pond, cradled by the Punchbowl, once the scene of bare-knuckle fights, and along a sunken road between huge, ancient trees described by Richard Mabey as a whirlpool of wood … immense gargoyles of beech”.
Climb again now, above the trees, squelching through bog and gorse, to the bleak, tussocky summit plateau, the world around you opening up.
To the north the Skirrid and Sugar Loaf loom proprietorially over Abergavenny; to the west is Pen y Fan, south Wales’ highest peak; and to the south the Bristol Channel glints under the winter sun, if you are so blessed.
Take extra clothes, for the Blorenge can be a beast when she blows.
Near the summit (561 metres) is a bronze age burial site, and a plaque marking the place where Foxhunter, a champion showjumper, was buried in 1959.
The ashes of his rider, Sir Harry Llewellyn, were scattered on the same spot in 1999.
Find a place in the lee of rocks to eat your sandwiches and contemplate the two words in the English language that rhyme with orange.
You’re sitting on one.
Turn for home now, the hard work done, dropping down around the western flank of the mountain, past a Somme-like wasteland on the hillside, until recently a magnificent larch wood before the rampaging ramorum disease wiped it out.
Back in Abergavenny, bag one of the sumptuous leather sofas next to the roaring fire in the wood-panelled Foxhunter bar of the Angel Hotel – 2020 Cesar Welsh Hotel of the Year – and order a pint of Sir Harry, named after the late, great showjumper.
You will have earned it.
It would be perfect to arrive in picturesque Clare by train to start this stroll amid quietly magical countryside, but Richard Beeching took that from us in the 1960s.
The ornate Victorian station building is now the friendly, warm Platform One cafe.
Clare country park is hard to tear yourself away from, with its lofty ruins of a Norman castle, its greens, woods, old priory, ponds and railway platforms.
And then there’s one of southern England’s most charismatic rivers, the Stour, of Constable fame.
His most famous painting, at Flatford Mill, depicts scenes 30 miles south-east, in the more frequented Dedham Vale.
But Clare revels in its relative obscurity, with a profusion of well-signposted walks starting from the country park.
This route to another characterful village, Cavendish, takes walkers south initially, past the handsome Mill House and across the Stour into Essex.
Here it turns east along a never-ending line of hedgerows alive with the flitterings of small birds, including linnets and corn buntings.
In front of 16th-century Bower Hall, the swiftly flowing Stour is shrouded by willows, a perfect spot to watch for kingfishers and, less likely, the otters now re-established on this stretch.
Nearing Cavendish, at Pentlow hamlet, an evocative early medieval church, St Gregory’s, with an unusual round tower and in great nick, appears between trees.
Now turning north and crossing the river back into Suffolk, the route passes gardens and eccentric cottages as it enters Cavendish.
The unpretentious, Greene King-serving Five Bells commands the large village green and is an ideal pit stop.
Behind is St Mary’s church, where it’s claimed that in 1381 the local big cheese, John Cavendish, was seized, later to be killed in revenge for the slaying of peasants’ revolt leader Wat Tyler.
Cross the green and pass the cemetery to head west across low hills and vast fields, gold, green and black under the lowering winter sun, and through woody dips back to Clare.
The village finally appears below, dominated by yet another Grade I-listed church.
Drop in at the traditionally styled Swan, which serves Adnams, Timothy Taylor’s Landlord and solid homemade pub grub, including four veggie options and pizzas.
But beer aficionados who aren’t hungry might prefer to walk through the village for 10 minutes to The Globe, a lively Camra-award winner, with guest ales and live bands.
Both are dog friendly.
I celebrate when the first light of a new year hits the skies.
For day one I need to be outside, with a face full of cold sea air and a view of some broiling waves.
This walk delivers exactly that.
It is a point-to-point walk along the North Cornwall coastal path.
The path is clear but requires scrambling in places.
It’s one of those you might decide upon casually, perhaps the morning after a night in St Ives, thinking a walk to a pub would be nice; then halfway through you remember it’s four hours long and that’s quite a long time.
After a couple of hours, the headland becomes wild Atlantic coast.
You might see seals below, basking on black rocks by turquoise, ice-cold water.
You consider scrambling down the cliffside to strip off and dunk yourself in that refreshing scene as a baptism of faith – in the days and seasons to come.
The walk becomes a meditation of sorts, where all that needs to happen is to reach point B and you will find civilisation again; but for now the work of putting one foot in front of the other brings space and peace.
Just when you feel thoroughly fatigued you take the path away from the sea to Zennor, and find yourself in a low-ceilinged 13th-century inn with a roaring fire, ordering thick-cut salty chips and sipping cold beer through wind-chapped lips.
DH Lawrence called Zennor the most beautiful place”, with a view of the infinite Atlantic … lovelier even than the Mediterranean … It is the best place I have been in, I think. ”
Made even lovelier by arriving on foot, the whole walk is a fantastic way to process the year past and begin anew.
On reaching Zennor you can book a taxi back to St Ives, or take the bus, although as there are no buses on New Year’s Day, you could make this a circular walk back through the countryside, via Tremedda and Trevalgan – a total distance of 12 miles.
At the entrance to the Kentmere valley a perfect wooded dome rises behind the village of Staveley.
The path enters Craggy Woods at a small wooden gate on the back road to Littlewood, then traverses the hillside beneath the eponymous vaulting crags.
The route winds its way steeply, affording views south over the valley of the River Kent.
Buzzards frequent Craggy, as the wood is known, and with the right conditions they can be heard mewing contact calls as they surf thermals.
On reaching the top, the rewards are great.
Not only do walkers continue at the level of the ancient beech canopy, but looking north, a zen landscape of rocky outcrops and sheltering field hawthorn unfolds, leading the eye into the head of the Kentmere valley and the summits of Shipman Knotts, Kentmere Pike, Froswick, Ill Bell and Yoke.
The path continues through a sheltered vale of ancient yew and beech, accumulations of last season’s golden leaves and beech mast crunching underfoot, then passes a pair of four-foot- high stone obelisks.
The pillars mark the position of air-vents used during the construction of the Thirlmere-to-Manchester aqueduct.
This feat of engineering, which opened in 1894, transports water directly from the centre of the Lake District 96 miles into the heart of Manchester, and tunnels directly underneath the wooded hillside.
It’s the longest gravity-fed aqueduct in Britain – there’s not a single pump along the route.
Elsewhere, a series of black gates inserted into drystone walls mark the ongoing route of the aqueduct.
At the woodland boundary turn right over the fields to Littlewood, along the lanes at the back of Craggy, passing beneath the slopes of Potter Fell and winding past a discreet little tarn hidden behind an outcrop fusion of rock and tree.
Staveley offers a choice of excellent hostelries, from the Mill Yard’s Wilf’s Café, on the banks of the River Kent, More Bakery or, further along the main street, ale and good grub at the Eagle and Child.
A shifting and moody landscape, one minute frozen solid, then squelching through mud, this is the perfect walk to shift gear into winter.
It’s not a taxing route, but encourages a steady rhythm, allowing the mind to wander and random conversation to ensue while bumping into the odd fell runner or solo walker.
The landscape provides a rich tapestry of colours and textures you can’t help but pause to take in, savouring the moment and allowing yourself the pleasure of setting your own pace.
Long enough to feel virtuous, the real treat is finding The Twelve Apostles, a prehistoric stone circle set high up on the moors, the perfect place for a winter solstice gathering to gaze at the stars.
Originally said to have been 20 stones, it is believed it was used to observe the sun and the moon, allowing bronze age settlers to know when winter was coming.
This intriguing and playful ancient site is the perfect pit stop before continuing on to either the Doubler Stones and Ilkley, or back to the pub for warmth and rewards.
Dick Hudsons Pub was formerly a hostelry that was famous for its food and wine between 1850 and 1878, long before it was taken over by the eponymous Mr Hudson, who was a farmer and food lover.
A cosy country pub complete with roaring log fire, it welcomes muddy boots and paws”.
Savour a hot chocolate or a warming whisky as you look out onto one of the best views in the country and plan your next ramble.
Taking in some of Northern Ireland’s most picturesque coastal towns and villages, this 16- mile trek sees beachy vistas and country parks give way to tucked-away treasures and much more besides.
After taking in postcard-worthy panoramas at the esplanade in Holywood, start off in the morning towards Bangor via the Royal North Yacht Club.
In this first section, navigating a little public footpath before rejoining the coastal path is a pay-off in itself – with the consistent promise of beautifully rugged coastline, by way of winding gravel and asphalt pathways, blooms of winter wildflowers, offshore grey seals and a soul-affirming sea breeze.
A jewel in the crown of windswept North Down, even in winter, Helen’s Bay Beach in Crawfordsburn country park is as idyllic as it comes.
Set aside some time to take in its gently shelving sands, which are framed by the wooded headlands and meadows.
Ready for a little rest?
Mosey into the village of Crawfordsburn to warm up in The Old Inn, which is also a fine boutique hotel (doubles from £80 B&B) located on one of the island’s most ancient highways, leading from Holywood Priory to the Parent Abbey at Bangor.
You will find easy access to Helen’s Bay railway station if you wish to cut the walk short here.
Otherwise, resume towards Orlock Point in Portavo via the seaside town of Bangor.
Offering stunning views of the Copeland Islands, across the Irish Sea towards Scotland, the end of the trail doubles up as an enchanting mosaic of semi-natural habitats which support a rich medley of plants and animals.
Still kicking?
A further two-mile amble down the coast to rest up at the supremely cosy Grace Neill’s in Donaghadee will seal the deal.
Opened in 1611, it’s a perfectly secluded little inn to come into from out of the cold, sip a hot whiskey and reflect upon sore heels and a day well spent.
From Orlock Point or Donaghadee catch the frequent bus back to Bangor station or beyond.
As the propeller blades slowed, feathered and stopped, I couldn’t help but be impressed.
I’ve done quite a lot of gliding over and around mountains, but never in an aircraft with a maximum take-off weight (MTOW) of 4, 740kg (10, 449lb).
As you approach a Pilatus PC-12NG your initial thought is that, for a single-engine aircraft, it really is quite a big machine.
Standing 4. 26, (13, 9ft), it towers over most of the other aircraft on an average GA ramp, even the twin-engine ones.
The Swiss have always had a reputation for quality engineering, and as Pilatus production test pilot Jan Schatteman and I walked around the gleaming PC-12NG, I could see immediately that it was beautifully made.
Starting at the spinner, it is powered by a Pratt & Whitney PT6A-68P turboprop which can produce up to 1, 845shp (1, 376kW).
All the power is converted into thrust via a four-blade aluminium Hartzell prop, which is both fully feathering and reversible.
The single-slotted Fowler flaps cover 67% of the trailing edge to keep the stall speed down, but as small ailerons often result in reduced control authority around the longitudinal axis, I wondered if spoilers were fitted to augment the lateral control (as they are on the TBM series).
I was surprised to see that they aren’t, and made a mental note to check the roll rate.
The wings feature elegant winglets and I wondered if they contributed to the aileron’s efficiency, possibly by contrasting spanwise flow.
The Honeywell weather radar is housed in a pod at the starboard wing tip, while de-ice protection is provided by Goodrich pneumatic boots on the wings and tailplane, and engine bleed-air to the intake.
The windscreen and prop are heated electrically, just like they are in airliners.
This is a much better method than ducting engine bleed-air onto the screen which is always noisy and less efficient at reduced power during the descent and on the approach – just when you need them.
I could see that in many respects the PC-12NG has been designed and built to far higher specifications than it required.
Many of its features are more reminiscent of a transport category aeroplane, although with a maximum ramp weight of 4, 760kg (10, 494lb) the Federal Aviation Administration doesn’t need a type rating.
However, the European Aviation Safety Agency requires as the minimum a private pilots’ licence with High Performance Airplane (HPA) endorsement and type rating training, which is typically one week of ground school and a minimum of ten hours flight training (single-pilot, instrument flying rules).
Next to catch my eye was the undercarriage.
I knew that the PC-12NG had been approved to operate from unprepared landing strips and, having inspected the rugged-looking double trailing link main undercarriage and low-pressure tyres, I could see why.
The wheel track is also commendably wide (the main gear retracts inwards into the wings), while the nose leg retracts backwards into the fuselage.
I’d already spotted that (for a tricycle undercarriage) the nosewheel did seem to provide a lot of ground clearance for the prop.
This is maintained even with a flat tyre and the nose leg compressed – very impressive!
Other aspects of the aircraft that indicated it is designed to be used from airstrips as well as airports are powerful LED landing and taxi lights on each undercarriage leg and more lights in neat underwing ‘blisters’.
I now understand why the aircraft is such a firm favourite with Australia’s Royal Flying Doctor Service, which currently operates over of them.
As I moved towards the tail I noted the two ventral strakes and large dorsal fin, but what really got my attention was the giant cargo door aft of the wing.
At 1. 32m (4. 3ft) by 1. 35m (4. 4ft) it is absolutely enormous, and as it opens wide and is hinged at the top it makes loading and unloading very easy.
It’s little surprise that the PC-12NG is a favourite with freight companies, air ambulance operators and the military, as well as with private owners.
There is a pilot’s ‘airstair’ door forward of the wing, immediately aft of the cockpit.
Firstly, if you’re using the aircraft as a freighter you can fill the cabin to capacity without having to leave space for an aisle.
Most small freighters ‘bulk out’ (run out of space) before they ‘gross out’ (run out of weight-carrying capacity) – which is why the Cessna Caravan’s cargo pod is such a popular option.
Secondly, most private owners probably prefer to personally check that the door has been shut and locked correctly.
I next studied the large T-tail (unusual in an aircraft of this class), which is fitted with a stick shaker and a stick pusher.
I asked Jan what the stall was like; he replied with a grin that I would soon find out for myself!
Like many T-tail designs, it features a ‘bullet’ fairing.
By now I was itching to find out if the PC-12NG flew as good as it looked.
The big cargo door and large cabin have always been a major part of the PC-12’s success story, and once I’d got to the top of the airstair and entered the aircraft I could see why – it’s huge!
The cabin’s length (excluding the cockpit) is a generous 5. 16m (16. 9ft), and with a width of 1. 52m (4. 98ft) and a height of 1. 45m (4. 7ft), it is extremely spacious.
At the back of the cabin is the baggage compartment, which has a capacity of 1. 13m3 (39. 9ft3).
It is heated, pressurised and fully accessible in flight.
Another excellent feature is the design of the lavatory.
This is immediately aft of the cockpit, and is closed off on both sides by folding doors.
Many aircraft use curtains instead of doors, which is certainly not as private.
The PC- 12’s is a much better idea.
Jan and I now made our way into the cockpit.
The seats are extremely comfortable and offer plenty of adjustment (even the armrests move, while the headrests have six positions).
The rudder pedals also adjust over a good range, while I fully approve of the fact that although the passenger seats have threepoint restraint systems, the pilot’s seats have four-point harnesses.
In common with other large single-engined turboprops, such as the Caravan and TBM 900, one of the PC-12NG’s biggest selling points is that it is certified for single-pilot operation and so very much aimed at the owner-pilot.
Consequently, as I began to study the instruments and controls I was curious to see how user-friendly the cockpit was.
The instrument panel is fitted with the advanced Honeywell Primus Apex suite.
This consists of four identically-sized liquid crystal display screens – two are primary flight displays (PFDs) and the other two (used as multi-function displays [MFDs], one each for systems and situational awareness) are mounted vertically in the centre of the panel.
Each screen has a diagonal size of 255mm (10in) and is easy to read, even in bright sunlight.
Cleverly, each screen can be sub-divided into 1/6th, 1/3rd or 2/3rd sections, with each containing different data, such as engine parameters or navigation information.
Aircraft configuration, for example trim, undercarriage and flap position, is also shown here.
It’s a very elegant and intuitive system, yet although each one of the three individual undercarriage position icons can show seven different displays, I’d still also like to see three lights adjacent to the undercarriage selector.
There are no analogue instruments at all, as the back-up instrumentation consists of a small, selfcontained Emergency Standby Instrument System to the left of the captain’s PFD.
This neat little unit displays attitude, speed and altitude, and can run off its own integral battery in the unlikely event of a total electrical failure.
An alpha/numeric keypad for the flight management system (FMS) is located below the lower MFD, with a large cursor control device aft of the power control lever.
Jan demonstrated how to programme the FMS by moving the cursor with the track ball, while inputs are confirmed by using the ‘enter’ softkey, as you would on any computer.
It appeared to be both easy and intuitive.
As the flight deck is wireless it is possible to input data swiftly and simply – useful when programming the FMS with multiple sectors or a particularly complex flight plan.
There isn’t a prop lever.
Instead, prop control is automatic, and prop speed never exceeds a nice, slow (and quiet) 1, 700rpm.
Another transport category-type feature fitted to the aircraft is the Crew Alerting System.
There are red ‘Master Warning’ and orange ‘Master Caution’ lights, sensibly sited just above the PFDs, while the nature of the out-of-limits condition is displayed on the system’s MFD.
As on many turbine-powered aircraft, the switches for most of the electrical systems – such as the external lights, starter and generator – are in the overhead panel.
The centre console carries just a few switches and rheostats for the internal lights, along with the power lever, fuel condition lever and flap selector.
The control yoke is liberally studded with switches, buttons and even a trigger, which must be pulled to allow use of trim control.
One particularly noticeable aspect of the cockpit is how big and robust the switches (mostly large rockers) are.
However, I did wonder if perhaps the switches would be colour- coded rather than the somewhat anonymous gray.
Jan started the engine, while I watched closely.
The start sequence is very straightforward – simply switch on the batteries, then press ‘start’, and at 15%Ng (gas generator speed) move the fuel condition lever to ‘ground Idle’.
The engine lit promptly, and we moved onto the pretake- off checks.
These included checking the stall protection system (remember it has a stick-shaker and a stick-pusher) lowering the flaps to 15° and setting the trims.
Taxying from the Pilatus factory to Buochs airport is an unusual and possibly unique experience as you cross a busy road.
However, the traffic lights are (properly) biased in the pilot’s favour, and I’ve never had a long wait.
Taxying was very easy because the nosewheel steers through the rudder pedals and the hydraulic brakes are both powerful and progressive.
Although I ensured that the power lever was on the idle stop, in common with most turboprops there’s so much thrust that it wanted to taxi faster than I did.
Rather than ride the brakes, I pulled the power lever up over the gate and back into the ‘Beta’ range.
Approaching the runway I pushed the fuel condition lever to ‘Flight Idle’ and carefully taxied into position.
Having lined up on Buochs’ 2, 000m (6, 561ft) runway 07, I brought the power up against the brakes.
A glance at the windsock showed a gentle crosswind from port, while as ambient conditions were essentially International Standard Atmosphere (ISA) we had a density altitude of about 1, 500ft (457m).
With two passengers on board, no baggage and 750kg (1, 653lb) of Jet A-1 in the tanks we were around 1, 040kg (2, 292lb) below the MTOW, with a fairly forward centre of gravity.
With 1, 200shp at my command the acceleration was unsurprisingly excellent.
Unlike most of the other turboprops that I’ve flown, in the PC-12NG you don’t have to monitor the torque gauge, as the torque limiter automatically protects the engine.
Instead, I just smoothly pushed the power lever forward to the stop and concentrated on keeping straight.
Tracking the centreline was easy, despite the crosswind.
The airspeed increased quickly and I rotated at 85kts (157km/h).
It was interesting to note how little the pitch attitude seems to change at rotation, but this could be an optical illusion as the long cowling slopes down and away from the cockpit.
I then retracted the undercarriage, engaged the yaw damper and raised the flaps.
The undercarriage comes up with no discernible change in pitch trim, but as the flaps retract, the trim changes and the aircraft seems to ‘settle’ slightly; although it’s easily trimmed out (as long as you remember to pull the trigger before operating the trimmer).
The 1, 200shp turning a big four-blade prop produces considerable amounts of precession and P-factor (asymmetric blade effect).
Consequently, without the yaw damper you’d have to adjust the rudder trim whenever you changed either the airspeed or power setting if you wanted to keep the pedal forces neutral and the slip ball centred.
With the yaw damper engaged, the automatics keep the slip ball centred, although initially it’s slightly disconcerting to feel the rudder pedals moving under your feet.
I let the aircraft quickly accelerate to 130kts (240km/h), and as we’re relatively light the rate of climb is phenomenal, and we’re soon at 10, 000ft (3, 048m).
An examination of the general handling revealed the roll rate to be brisk, and with surprisingly low stick forces.
I had read that earlier models were rather heavy in roll, but one of the changes Pilatus installed in 2006 was a servo-tab in each aileron.
For such a big machine, I thought it very pleasant to ‘hand fly’, and noted that the control harmony was also good, while the stick-free stability is outstanding.
Jan encouraged me to make full use of the PFD, and I found that if I placed and held the flight path marker icon on the horizon’s ‘zero-pitch’ reference line then I don’t lose a foot of altitude.
Because the PC-12NG has a T-tail, it is fitted with both a stick-shaker and a stick- pusher.
There is an electrically heated angle of attack vane in the outboard leading edge of each wing, and when this senses the alpha is approaching a critical value the stall warner sounds and the stick-shaker actuates.
If no recovery action is taken then the stick-pusher fires.
This pushes the control yoke forward with a force of around 28kg (61lb).
As we were a good way below MTOW, with the flaps at 40° I managed to get the indicated airspeed down to almost 65kts (120km/h) before the shaker activated, while the pusher fired at about 60kts (111km/h).
These are pretty slow speeds for an aircraft this big that can cruise at up 270kts (500km/h) and 30, 000ft (9, 144m).
The PC-12NG is very much a ‘going places’ machine, and not only is it in its element at altitude but sometimes favourable winds can add 100kts (185km/h) to the groundspeed.
For a few days most of northern Europe had experienced particularly good visibility because of a so-called ‘Polar plume’ of Arctic air that had swept down from the north and, from 30, 000ft above the Alps, the view is stupendous.
From our lofty perch Jan points out Austria, France, Germany and Italy.
The maximum cruise speed is 280kts (518km/h), but a more representative and efficient speed is between 250-260kts (463- 481km/h).
With an outside air temperature of - 44 °C (-47. 2°F) conditions are essentially ISA, and at 255kts (472km/h) we’re only burning around 225kg/h (496lb/h).
Jan then directs me to perform an emergency descent as if the pressurisation has failed.
As with most turboprops, if you pull the power right back, the prop generates loads of drag, and it was easy to achieve a very high descent rate (8, 500ft per minute/43m per second) without excessive speed.
As for the pressurisation, all I can say is that I never noticed it working – which is exactly what you want.
I level out at 12, 000ft (3, 657m) and Jan takes control.
There’s a way we can burn even less fuel,  he grins.
During the briefing Jan had explained that on production test flights and engine change-related maintenance flights, company test pilots perform an in- flight shutdown and re-light within the glide-cone of Pilatus’s base airfield.
I can see we’re practically overhead Buochs, so having informed air traffic control of our intentions, he pulls the fuel condition lever back, the prop disc turns into four blades which slow and feather – and we’re in a 3, 600kg (7, 936lb) glider, high above the Alps.
As an experienced sailplane pilot I automatically note our speed, sink rate and altitude, and then do a quick ‘final glide’ calculation.
We’re gliding at 115kts (212km/h) while sinking at 800ft/min (‘eight down’ in glider parlance) which means that we would have 30 minutes from a 30, 000ft cruising altitude to restart the engine.
In the extremely unlikely event of it not restarting we could glide around 60 miles (96km), enabling us to not only reach many suitable airports, but even several different countries.
We head off to Grenchen, a GA airfield close to Bern, where the autopilot flies a perfect precision approach (aka ‘Coupled Baro-VNAV’) even though the groundbased navaids make this particular runway non-precision (it only has VHF omri-range/ distance measuring equipment).
Returning to Buochs was easy in the great visibility, but in more inclement weather the exceptional situational awareness provided by the Apex system would’ve been much appreciated, particularly as the 7, 000ft (2, 133m)-tall Mount Pilatus is inside the circuit when you’re downwind for runway 25.
Jan demonstrates a remarkable shortfield landing with full reverse and then it’s my turn.
The undercarriage and flaps both extend smoothly, although the aircraft does balloon slightly as the flaps reach 40ş.
Jan recommends placing the flight path marker symbol on the virtual runway’s threshold (remember the PFD uses synthetic vision) and then controlling the speed with power.
This works out pretty well, and after a smooth touch-and-go the second landing is very gentle.
Pull the power control lever into reverse and we stop amazingly quickly.
I’m rather pleased with my second landing, although Jan deflates my ego somewhat by pointing out the trailing-link undercarriage is a flatterer, and that you actually have to apply yourself to make a bad landing.
In conclusion, I can see why the PC-12NG is so popular.
It truly is a pilot’s aeroplane, with good performance and fine handling.
There’s always a temptation to compare an aircraft with another, particularly if they are both powered by the same engine.
However, I cannot think of any other single-engined turboprop I’ve flown that is capable of hauling such a heavy load (or nine passengers) or flying over 1, 800nm (3, 333km) from a short, unprepared runway.
Comparisons are meaningless – the PC-12NG is, quite literally, in a class of its own.
With its excellent range, large cabin and ability to cruise at high speed yet loiter for hours on end at low speed, Pilatus realised that the PC-12 would make an ideal multimission platform and it developed a variant of the aircraft to carry different sensors.
Originally known as Eagle and now called Spectre, this model features a retractable sensor platform and a seven-passenger utility interior, including a sensor operator’s console, as standard.
However, most Spectres are custom-tailored to the user’s specific mission requirements.
A typical operator console incorporates two display monitors, a digital video recorder, a communications panel and a lift-platform control, although multiple expansion bays allow additional radios and data links.
The operator’s seat is equipped with an Inflatable Restraint System, allowing it to be safely occupied during take-off and landing.
The sensor platform is housed in the aircraft’s tail cone and it can be extended and retracted in flight.
Once deployed it provides a full 360ş field of view, and when retracted it is covered by a pair of doors.
As well as electro-optical and infrared sensors, the Spectre can also carry the Multi-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar, while the cabin can be rapidly reconfigured by removing the operator’s console – the wiring harness uses a single quickdisconnect plug and the console is held in place by latches.
Spectres are operated by many air forces and government agencies and have been used for a wide variety of operations, including intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance missions, border surveillance, drug enforcement and disaster relief.
It was quite a sight: a mound of branches and saplings, about eight feet high by 35 feet across, plastered with mud and moss and sitting in a waist-high lake surrounded by marsh.
The water had been diverted from the river by a series of dams.
Tape and Wald had wanted to explore the Alatna in part because a guide who works for Wald had earlier found beaver-chewed wood along the Nigu River.
The Nigu starts near Gaedeke Lake, the Alatna headwaters, but on the other side of the Continental Divide—and so it flows north into the Colville River and the Arctic Ocean.
Along the Alatna, above Lodge Mahal, we found other ponds and abandoned dams.
Tape now thinks that beavers are on their way to the North Slope, and that they’re using the Alatna as a route through the Brooks Range.
We’re seeing this expansion in real time,  he said.
He can’t prove that climate change is driving it; the beaver population also has been rebounding since the end of the fur trade, a century and a half ago.
But in any case, the bucktoothed engineers could significantly remake permafrost landscapes.
Imagine if you were a developer and you said, I’d like permission to put three dams on every other stream in the Arctic tundra, Tape said.
That’s what this could be like.
Tape has seen a preview.
Southeast of Shishmaref, on Alaska’s Seward Peninsula, photos of a tributary of the Serpentine River show no change at all between 1950 and 1985.
By 2002 beavers had moved in and flooded the landscape.
By 2012 some ground had collapsed and become wetlands.
Permafrost was on its way out.
