Well, the fame of the fairy-tree spread far and wide, and every day some adventurer came to try if he could carry away some of the berries; but the giant, true to his word, was always on the watch, and not a single day passed on which he did not fight and slay a daring champion, and the giant never received a wound, for fire could not burn him, nor water drown him, nor weapon wound him.
Now, at this time, when Sharvan was keeping watch and ward over the tree, a cruel king was reigning over the lands that looked towards the rising sun.
He had slain the rightful king by foul means, and his subjects, loving their murdered sovereign, hated the usurper; but much as they hated him they feared him more, for he was brave and masterful, and he was armed with a helmet and shield which no weapon made by mortal hands could pierce, and he carried always with him two javelins that never missed their mark, and were so fatal that they were called the shafts of death.
The murdered king had two children––a boy, whose name was Niall, and a girl, who was called Rosaleen––that is, little Rose; but no rose that ever bloomed was half as sweet or fresh or fair as she.
Cruel as the tyrant king was, he was afraid of the people to kill the children.
He sent the boy adrift on the sea in an open boat, hoping the waves would swallow it; and he got an old witch to cast the spell of deformity over Rosaleen, and under the spell her beauty faded, until at last she became so ugly and wasted that scarcely anyone would speak to her.
And, shunned by everyone, she spent her days in the out-houses with the cattle, and every night she cried herself to sleep.
One day, when she was very lonely, a little robin came to pick the crumbs that had fallen about her feet.
He appeared so tame that she offered him the bread from her hand, and when he took it she cried with joy at finding that there was one living thing that did not shun her.
After this the robin came every day, and he sang so sweetly for her that she almost forgot her loneliness and misery.
But once while the robin was with her the tyrant king’s daughter, who was very beautiful, passed with her maids of honour, and, seeing Rosaleen, the princess said: Oh, there is that horrid ugly thing.
The maids laughed and giggled, and said they had never seen such a fright.
Poor Rosaleen felt as if her heart would break, and when the princess and her maids were out of sight she almost cried her eyes out.
When the robin saw her crying he perched on her shoulder and rubbed his little head against her neck and chirruped softly in her ear, and Rosaleen was comforted, for she felt she had at least one friend in the world, although it was only a little robin.
But the robin could do more for her than she could dream of.
He heard the remark made by the princess, and he saw Rosaleen’s tears, and he knew now why she was shunned by everybody, and why she was so unhappy.
And that very evening he flew off to Dooros Wood, and called on a cousin of his and told him all about Rosaleen.
And you want some of the fairy berries, I suppose, said his cousin, Robin of the Wood.
I do, said Rosaleen’s little friend.
Ah, said Robin of the Wood, times have changed since you were here last.
The tree is guarded now all the day long by a surly giant. He sleeps in the branches during the night, and he breathes upon them and around them every morning, and his breath is poison to bird and bee.
There is only one chance open, and if you try that it may cost you your life.
Then tell me what it is, for I would give a hundred lives for Rosaleen, said her own little robin.
Well, said Robin of the Wood, every day a champion comes to battle with the giant, and the giant, before he begins the fight, puts a branch of berries in the iron belt that’s around his waist, so that when he feels tired or thirsty he can refresh himself, and there is just a bare chance, while he is fighting, of picking one of the berries from the branch; but if his breath fall on you it is certain death.
I will take the chance, said Rosaleen’s robin.
Very well, said the other.
And the two birds flew through the wood until they came within sight of the fairy tree.
The giant was lying stretched at the foot of it, eating the berries; but it was not long until a warrior came, who challenged him to battle.
The giant jumped up, and plucking a branch from the tree stuck it in his belt, and swinging his iron club above his head strode towards the warrior, and the fight began.
The robin perched on a tree behind the giant, and watched and waited for his chance; but it was a long time coming, for the berries were in front of the giant’s belt.
At last the giant, with one great blow, struck the warrior down, but as he did so he stumbled and fell upon him, and before he had time to recover himself the little robin darted towards him like a flash and picked off one of the berries, and then, as fast as wings could carry him, he flew towards home, and on his way he passed over a troop of warriors on snow-white steeds.
All the horsemen except one wore silver helmets and shining mantles of green silk, fastened by brooches of red gold, but the chief, who rode at the head of the troop, wore a golden helmet, and his mantle was of yellow silk, and he looked by far the noblest of them all.
When the robin had left the horsemen far behind him he spied Rosaleen sitting outside the palace gates bemoaning her fate.
The robin perched upon her shoulder, and almost before she knew he was there he put the berry between her lips, and the taste was so delicious that Rosaleen ate it at once, and that very moment the witch’s withering spell passed away from her, and she became as lovely as the flower of beauty.
Just then the warriors on the snow-white steeds came up, and the chief with the mantle of yellow silk and the golden helmet leaped from his horse, and bending his knee before her, said: Fairest of all fair maidens, you are surely the daughter of the king of these realms, even though you are without the palace gates, unattended, and wear not royal robes.
I am the Prince of the Sunny Valleys.
Daughter of a king I am, said Rosaleen, but not of the king who rules these realms.
And saying this she fled, leaving the prince wondering who she could be.
The prince then ordered his trumpeters to give notice of his presence outside the palace, and in a few moments the king and all his nobles came out to greet the prince and his warriors, and give them welcome.
That night a great feast was spread in the banquet-hall, and the Prince of the Sunny Valleys sat by the king, and beside the prince sat the king’s beautiful daughter, and then in due order sat the nobles of the court and the warriors who had come with the prince, and on the wall behind each noble and warrior his shield and helmet were suspended, flashing radiance through the room.
During the feast the prince spoke most graciously to the lovely lady at his side, but all the time he was thinking of the unknown beauty he had met outside the palace gates, and his heart longed for another glimpse of her.
When the feast was ended, and the jewelled drinking-cups had gone merrily around the table, the bards sang, to the accompaniment of harps, the Courtship of the Lady Eimer, and as they pictured her radiant beauty outshining that of all her maidens, the prince thought that fair as Lady Eimer was there was one still fairer.
When the feast was ended the king asked the prince what brought him into his realms.
I come, said the prince, to look for a bride, for it was foretold to me in my own country that here only I should find the lady who is destined to share my throne, and fame reported that in your kingdom are to be found the loveliest maidens in all the world, and I can well believe that, added the prince, after what I have seen to-day.
When the king’s daughter heard this she hung down her head and blushed like a rose, for, of course, she thought the prince was alluding only to herself, as she did not know that he had seen Rosaleen, and she had not heard of the restoration of her beauty.
Before another word could be spoken a great noise and the clang of arms were heard outside the palace.
The king and his guests started from their seats and drew their swords, and the bards raised the song of battle; but their voices were stilled and their harps silenced when they saw at the threshold of the banquet hall a battle champion, in whose face they recognised the features of their murdered king.
’Tis Niall come back to claim his father’s throne, said the chief bard.
Long live Niall!
Long live Niall! answered all the others.
The king, white with rage and amazement, turned to the chiefs and nobles of his court, and cried out: Is there none loyal enough to drive that intruder from the banquet hall?
But no one stirred, and no answer was given. Then the king rushed forward alone, but before he could reach the spot where Niall was standing he was seized by a dozen chiefs and at once disarmed.
During this scene the king’s daughter had fled frightened; but Rosaleen, attracted by the noise, and hearing her brother’s name and the cheers which greeted it, had entered the banquet hall unperceived by anyone.
But when her presence was discovered every eye was dazzled with her beauty.
Niall looked at her for a second, wondering if the radiant maiden before him could be the little sister he had been separated from for so many years.
In another second she was clasped in his arms.
Then the feast was spread again, and Niall told the story of his adventures; and when the Prince of the Sunny Valley asked for the hand of Rosaleen, Niall told his lovely sister to speak for herself.
With downcast eyes and smiling lips she said, yes, and that very day was the gayest and brightest wedding that ever took place, and Rosaleen became the prince’s bride.
In her happiness she did not forget the little robin, who was her friend in sorrow.
She took him home with her to Sunny Valleys, and every day she fed him with her own hands, and every day he sang for her the sweetest songs that were ever heard in lady’s bower.
Specially designed polymers can dodge the body’s immune defenses to deliver vital medicine where it is needed most.
Although we rarely think about it as we fill a prescription at the drugstore or refill an order through an online service, delivering medicine to its intended site inside the human body is an elaborate problem in materials science.
The challenge begins the moment a drug enters the digestive tract or the bloodstream.
The body naturally strives to defend itself against foreign invasion, even if the invasive substance is a lifesaving medicine.
Some of our inner defenses work strategically to destroy invading agents at the molecular level, such as the antibodies launched by the immune system that attack unfamiliar entities in the bloodstream.
Others act more like physical walls to tightly regulate intruding agents, such as the blood-brain barrier, a dense network of capillaries that separate the brain from circulating blood.
Even if a therapeutic compound clears these hurdles, it may still fail in its mission if it is prevented from dissolving properly, or even if it dissolves too quickly and is cleared from the body before it can act.
When an effective drug reaches the correct location in the body, at the right concentrations, and continues to work for the optimal amount of time, this represents the finish line of a very long obstacle course.
Some drugs manage to travel smoothly to their target site, whereas others are beset with challenges all the way.
Unfortunately, this second category includes drugs that are vital to preventive care for some of the most lethal diseases, such as cancer.
To develop more effective therapeutic agents, researchers need to come up with not only viable drug candidates but also adaptive materials for drug delivery— materials that could respond to changes in the immediate environment by altering their own physical properties.
Thanks to major advances in molecular engineering, scientists are now able to design materials so that they respond to specific kinds of external stimuli, including temperature, acidity, mechanical force, pressure, electrical potential, solvents, chemical agents, and even magnetic field, ionic strength, or certain wavelengths of light.
The nature of the response can vary as well: Modifications of a material’s shape or surface characteristics, self-assembly, the formation of more intricate molecules, and transitions in physical state are all possible under the right conditions.
Different materials address different types of problems.
One type turns into a gel when it warms up, then becomes a liquid again on cooling.
Another material can be woven into a textile that can break and re-form chemical bonds in response to photostimulation, enabling it to act as a light sensor.
These and other so-called smart materials are being developed right now in labs around the world.
Such materials offer applications ranging from the delivery of therapeutics, tissue engineering, and bioseparation to intelligent optical systems, sensors, and coatings.
Collectively, the new smart materials fall into the class that chemists call polymers.
The defining trait of polymers is that they consist of repeated chains of smaller molecules, like perfectly matched beads on a string.
This versatile structure occurs throughout the natural world, forming the basis of materials as varied as rubber, beetle shells, and the silken threads of a spider’s web.
The beads in a polymer (known, in chemical terms, as monomers) are all exactly the same and are bonded to one another—an arrangement that gives polymers strength and flexibility.
Moreover, many different monomers can be built up into polymers.
These compounds have long been an important part of the chemist’s bag of tricks, but it required molecular-level engineering to make the polymers smart, allowing them to adapt in desirable ways to changes in the environment.
A primary focus of the work in our lab is developing smart polymers that respond to changes in temperature.
If the chemical structure of a polymer resembles a long string of identical beads, thermo-responsive materials are made of polymers whose beads, suspended in a solution, change their behavior when the temperature of the solution reaches a certain threshold.
Above that critical temperature, the individual molecules of the polymer are transformed from a hydrophilic to a hydrophobic, or water-repellant, state—that is, they alter their shape, allowing less of their surface area to come in contact with surrounding water molecules.
This change disrupts the hydrogen-bonded network between the polymer chains and the water molecules that are in the solution.
The water is rapidly expelled and the polymeric chains collapse into globules, which causes the thermo-responsive material to precipitate out of the solution.
If the temperature drops back below the critical point, the polymeric molecules change back from hydrophobic to hydrophilic, absorbing a significant amount of water and transforming the material from a solid back to a solution.
Even though this phase transition has been widely observed to occur in both directions and has been documented in many different polymeric materials, scientists continue to debate exactly why it occurs.
According to one theory, disruption of the polymer-to-water interactions is the main factor that controls the phase transition.
Another theory holds that the most significant change takes place in the local structure of the water molecules surrounding the hydrophobic groups of the polymer.
A third theory offers a compromise of sorts: Perhaps, on reaching a critical temperature, the polymeric chains undergo a combination of changes occurring in both the hydrogen bonding and the hydrophobic interactions within the solution.
The phase transition in thermo-responsive polymers can also be explained from the point of view of thermodynamics.
At some critical temperature, it is energetically more favorable for phase separation to occur.
The entropy of the water is higher in the less ordered state, without polymer chains suspended in it.
Diving deeper into the thermodynamic interpretation: Initially the water molecules are trapped by hydrogen bonding with the polar groups of the polymer chain.
These trapped water molecules form a thin shell of ordered structure around the hydrophilic part of the polymer.
Meanwhile, elsewhere in the solution, water molecules interact with one another to form an ordered, ice-like structure around the hydrophobic part of the polymer chain.
This hydrogen-bonded network contributes to a larger negative entropy change—in other words, a transformation to a more ordered state.
Raising the temperature supplies enough energy to disrupt the hydrogen bonding within the water-polymer interaction; as a result, the hydrated water shells around the polymers break down, and within seconds the water molecules are forced into the bulk of the water.
But the most important fact about thermo-responsive materials is that they work.
With their unprecedented ability to alter their physical properties in response to temperature changes, thermo-responsive polymers make good building blocks for intelligent drug delivery systems, either on their own or in combination with other materials.
Medical scientists, biotechnologists, and pharmaceutical researchers have been quick to seize the opportunity.
ReGel® is a broadly used delivery platform made by Allergan and marketed in two formulations: OncoGel® when coupled with chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel for esophageal cancer, and Cytoryn™ when coupled with interleukin-2 (IL-2) for cancer immunotherapy.
In similar fashion, Timoptic-XE® (Merck & Co. ) is used for slow-release delivery of the drug timolol to treat hypertension within the eye.
At North Carolina Central University, our laboratory has pioneered the development of LiquoGel, another synthetic thermo-responsive polymer for targeted drug delivery.
(We have filed for a patent on this work, but have not yet begun to commercialize it. )
At room temperature, LiquoGel forms an aqueous solution that can be administered by syringe to specific sites in the body.
Once in place, the solution warms up to body temperature and assumes the form of a gel.
The therapeutic drug suspended in the solution becomes trapped within the gel, to be released gradually at the site of administration as the gel degrades.
The physical changes of LiquoGel on exposure to mild heat make it suitable for a variety of medical applications.
In one of its most extensively tested applications so far, collaborators at Duke University have identified targets in the treatment of uterine fibroids, for which LiquoGel can be pivotal in delivering insoluble, highly effective medicines.
Fibroid growths in the uterus, composed of muscle and fibrous tissue, affect 70 to 80 percent of all American women by the age of 50.
Although benign, uterine fibroids pose a significant public health problem when they cause pain or excessive menstrual bleeding, or problems in pregnancy.
As the leading indication for hysterectomy in the United States today, this condition entails healthcare costs of more than $2 billion each year.
Nevertheless, the current treatment options for uterine fibroids are unsatisfactory.
Surgical procedures (myomectomy, uterine artery embolization, and MRI-guided focused ultrasound) can destroy fibroids while preserving the uterus, but they are lengthy and expensive, and the fibroids frequently recur afterward.
Medical therapies, too, are often short-lived or accompanied by significant side effects, or their clinical trial results have been disappointing.
Effective drug molecules exist— selective progesterone receptor modulators, for example, have demonstrated significant shrinkage of fibroids and symptomatic improvement—but have not yet received FDA approval, owing to concerns over the effect of these agents on the endometrium.
Using polymers to deliver a therapeutic agent directly into uterine fibroids is a novel approach that has the potential to reduce systemic side effects considerably.
As an additional advantage, administering a drug directly to the fibroid can be used to deliver small peptides that would be degraded in the gastrointestinal tract if the drug were taken orally.
Treating fibroids by means of a local injection—a procedure that can be accomplished in a doctor’s office—could significantly improve the feasibility of helping women who want to maintain fertility while seeking relief from troubling uterine symptoms.
Moreover, by slowing the diffusion of the drug away from the injected fibroid, prolonging the release of the drug and delaying its inactivation, polymer-based treatments should reduce the need for repeated injections.
Other research teams have designed a different kind of thermo- responsive drug delivery system, one that uses a synthetic type of fluid-filled pouch called a liposome, for treating various medical conditions.
Although liposomes do not occur in nature, they are derived from biological polymers: Their bilayer, the membrane that encloses them, is made of the same phospholipids found in all living cells.
Clinical trials now under way are testing these thermo-sensitive liposomes (TSLs), as they are known, in several applications.
As an example, TSLs designed with a trigger temperature of 40 to 45 degrees C can deliver the antitumor drug doxorubicin (commercially known as ThermoDox®, made by Celsion Corporation) to specific sites.
Currently in Phase II clinical trials for the treatment of breast cancer and colorectal liver metastasis, the same drug delivery system has recently entered Phase III trials for the treatment of primary liver cell carcinoma.
Yet another approach was described by the research team of Z. S. Al-Ahmady at the Centre for Drug Discovery, University College London, using a peptide-liposome hybrid with a coil of the amino acid leucine embedded in the lipid bilayer, like a plug in a hole.
This system combines the TSL benefit of supramolecular assembly (the lipid bilayer plus the drug inside) with the property of responding to heat by unfolding its protein structure.
At cool temperatures, the peptide portion curls up on itself.
But above the trigger temperature—typically about 40 to 45 degrees C—the peptide’s primary fold opens like the two halves of a zipper, unsealing the outer membrane of the bilayer and releasing the drug at the desired site.
The ability to fine-tune the trigger temperature and the way the configuration of the molecules change in response to heat make leucine peptides attractive for the design of smart drug delivery vesicles.
The liposomes suitable for transporting drugs within the body must all be capable of releasing their contents, but not all liposomes are rendered permeable by the same means.
In some instances the lipid bilayer takes on a gel-like state that then degrades in the body, gradually releasing the drug.
In others, a peptide embedded in the bilayer breaks apart, leaving a hole.
Perhaps the most unexpected mechanism for opening a liposome at the right critical temperature is the use of bubbles.
This innovative approach relies on creating permeable defects in the lipid bilayer with carbon dioxide bubbles.
The carbon dioxide is generated (along with water and ammonia) as a result of the decomposition of ammonium bicarbonate—more commonly known as baking ammonia—at about 42 degrees C.
(This is, in fact, the same principle used to leaven bread and cakes.)
In this type of liposome delivery system, the gas bubbles created inside the membrane build up pressure and distort the arrangement of the membrane bilayers.
As the carbon dioxide bubbles permeate the lipid bilayer, the compartmentalized drug is quickly released.
The bubbles not only create the necessary defects in the lipid bilayer, enabling the drug to escape, they also help yield clearer results in ultrasound-guided tissue imaging.
