Everybody used amphetamines, he recalls.
During the war, to help morale, there were Army football teams, Navy boxing matches, and other sporting events.
Participants used amphetamines and found, Wow, these things really work well.
After they came home, from about 1946 on, amphetamines quickly became integrated into all varieties of sport.
Above, Pervitin, an amphetamine in use during World War II.
British troops alone got 72 million amphetamine tablets during the war.
According to one report, RAF pilots got so many it was said that Methedrine won the Battle of Britain.
In the 1950s, the Soviet Olympic team experimented with testosterone supplements to increase strength and power.
From 1974, the German Democratic Republic (GDR) sports federation had a mandatory state doping policy for athletes as young as 10, often without their knowledge.
By 1978, East German athletes in every sport except sailing were receiving anabolic steroids.
Yet in the 1976 and 1980 Summer Games, not one East German tested positive for drugs.
GDR athletes won 216 medals in those Olympics, 87 of them gold.
An estimated 10, 000 former East German athletes were scarred by drug abuse.
Above, Australian track star Raelene Boyle is beaten by East German Renate Stecher (left) in the 200-m Olympic Games final at the 1972 Munich Games.
Cycling has been drug-ridden since its inception in the 19th century and played a key role in the explosion of stimulant use after World War II.
In 1960, Danish cyclist Knud Enemark Jensen collapsed during the 100-km team time trial at the Rome Olympics and later died in the hospital; the autopsy revealed that he had taken amphetamine and the blood vessel dilator Ronicol.
Above, Jensen is attended by a Danish official after collapsing with heat stroke and suffering a fractured skull during the 100-km team time trial at the Rome Olympics in 1960.
He died a few hours later in the hospital.
John Bosley Ziegler, MD, a physician for the US weightlifting team in the 1950s and '60s, was having drinks with his Soviet counterpart in Vienna, Austria, in 1954 and learned that the success of the Soviet weightlifting team was due to their being given testosterone.
Deciding that US athletes needed a chemical edge to remain competitive, Dr Ziegler worked with the CIBA Pharmaceutical Company to develop an anabolic steroid, methandrostenolone (Dianabol), which appeared on the market in 1960.
The weight- and strength-gaining results were so impressive that steroid use quickly spread from weightlifters to other athletes.
Above, one of Doc Ziegler's star lifters, Ike Berger, shown here at the 1964 Tokyo Olympics.
At a body weight of 130 pounds, he was kilo for kilo the strongest man in the world.
Anabolic steroid use was thought to be limited in the 1960 Olympic Games, but by the 1964 Games, the startling improvement in many strength athletes was impossible to ignore.
Soon steroids were being extensively used by athletes in all strength sports.
By the mid-1960s, most top-ranking shot-putters and discus, javelin, and hammer throwers were taking steroids.
By 1968, sprinters, hurdlers, and middle-distance runners had joined them.
At the 1968 pre-Olympic training camp, an estimated one third of the entire US track and field team had used steroids.
Said a US weightlifting team doctor, I don't think it is possible for a weight man to compete internationally without using anabolic steroids.
Above, Arnold Schwarzenegger, former Mr Olympia and Mr Universe.
He admitted taking steroids in a 1977 interview.
Coaches and athletes in other sports quickly reached the same conclusion.
Drugs work, Dr Yesalis concedes.
If you train naturally for a hundred years, as far as your strength and physicality, you'll never get to the place that you can with some of these drugs.
Indeed, between 1956 and 1972, Olympic statistics show that the weight of shot putters increased 14%; the weight of steeplechasers increased 7.6%.
A medical team in the United States attempted to set up extensive research into the effects of steroids on weightlifters and throwers, recalled Olympic pentathlete gold medal winner Mary Peters, only to discover there were so few who weren't taking them that they couldn't establish any worthwhile comparisons.
Some athletes were taking 10 - 100 mg of steroids a day.
Above, the Soviet Union's Tamara Press wins the gold medal in the shot put, setting a new Olympic record for the event in the 1960 Rome Olympics.
In football and baseball, drugs were often introduced by team coaches, trainers, and doctors as well as players.
As one doctor with the St. Louis Cardinals baseball team told Sports Illustrated in 1969, We occasionally use Dexamyl and Dexedrine [amphetamines]…
We also used barbiturates, Seconal, Tuinal, Nembutal…
We also used some antidepressants, Triavil, Tofranil, Valium.
But, he added, I don't think the use of drugs is as prevalent in the Midwest as it is on the East and West Coasts.
A former San Diego Charger told a California legislative committee on drug abuse in 1970, We had to take them [steroids] at lunchtime. He [a team official] would put them on a little saucer and prescribed them for us to take them and if not he would suggest there might be a fine.
Above, San Diego Chargers' defensive tackle Ernie Ladd in 1963.
Ladd was the largest player of his time: 6 feet 9 inches and 315 pounds, with a 52-inch chest, 39-inch waist, 20-inch biceps, 19-inch neck, and size 18D shoes.
In 1928, the IAAF first attempted to ban athletes for doping, but without reliable drug tests, officials had to rely on the honor system.
Actual drug testing of athletes began at the 1966 European Athletics Championships.
In 1968, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) introduced drug testing at both the Summer and Winter Olympics.
Anabolic steroids were banned in 1976, after a reliable test was developed, and in the late 1970s, doping-related disqualifications, particularly in strength-related sports, markedly increased.
In the 1970s and 1980s, however, news of drug use in sport was relegated to the sports pages of newspapers, if it was reported at all.
The practice had not public scandal.
In the 1990s, that changed.
yet risen to the level of major Above, the 110-m hurdles at the 1976 Montreal Olympiad, the first in which full-scale drug testing took place, says Dr Yesalis.
At the 1988 Summer Olympics, Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson won the 100-m dash.
But when a subsequent drug test found the steroid stanozolol in his urine, he was stripped of his gold medal; the world-record title went to American sprinter Carl Lewis, the runner-up.
In 2003, however, it was revealed that Lewis was among those who had failed drug tests at the 1988 Olympic trials—he had tested positive for banned stimulants and bronchodilators—and should have been disqualified.
But by 2003, the tests had been revised, and the amount of drugs found in Lewis in 1988 would not have triggered a positive test in 2003.
As such, he was allowed to keep his title.
Ben Johnson was the biggest sports scandal ever, says Dr Yesalis.
It was on the front page of virtually every newspaper.
It was the first time people said, 'Wait a minute, I thought you tested these people.'
Above, Ben Johnson in action during the 1988 Summer Olympics, winning the 100-m race before being stripped of his medal and record for illegal drug use.
By the 2000s, the true extent of drug use in elite athletes was coming out.
In 2003 (the year Major League Baseball introduced its first steroid policy), the BALCO Affair exploded.
The Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative in Burlingame, California, marketed a then- undetectable designer steroid, terahydrogestrinone (THG, known as The Clear).
Shortly after, a test for THG was developed, and 550 existing urine samples from athletes were tested; 20 tested positive.
THG, it emerged, had been used by a number of high-profile sports stars. They included Major League Baseball players (Barry Bonds, Bobby Estalella, Jeremy Giambi, Amando Rios, and Benito Santiago); National Football League players (Chris Cooper, Bill Romanowski, Barrett Robbins, Dana Stubblefield, and Tyrone Wheatley, all of the Oakland Raiders); track and field athletes (hammer thrower John McEwen; shot putters CJ Hunter and Kevin Toth; and sprinters Zhanna Block, Dwain Chambers, Marion Jones, Tim Montgomery, Raymond J. Smith, and Kelli White; and middle-distance runner Regina Jacobs); boxer Shane Mosely; and cyclist Tammy Thomas.
Literally hundreds of athletes were tested hundreds if not thousands of times in a variety of sports and never got caught, says Dr Yesalis.
