A few hundred beavers won’t reengineer the Arctic.
But the animals may be heading north in Canada and Siberia too, and they reproduce quickly.
Argentina’s experience is instructive: Twenty beavers were deliberately introduced in the south in 1946 in order to foster a fur trade.
Today that population hovers around 100, 000.
In the Zimovs’ vision of the past and future of Arctic permafrost, wild animals also play a central role—but the beasts are bigger than beavers, and their effect on permafrost more benevolent.
They fertilized it with their waste and packed it down, trampling mosses and shrubs and ripping out tree saplings.
Since the last ice age, those dry, rich grasslands have been replaced in eastern Siberia by damp tundra, dominated by mosses in the north and forests farther south.
One key driver of that change, according to Zimov, was human hunters who decimated the herds of large grazers, by about 10, 000 years ago.
Without grazers to fertilize the soil, grasses withered; without grasses to soak up water, the soil got wetter.
Mosses and trees took over.
But if humans hadn’t pushed the ecosystem beyond a tipping point thousands of years ago, there would still be mammoths grazing in Siberia.
Almost 25 years ago, on lowlands near Cherskiy, Zimov created a 56-square-mile demonstration project called Pleistocene Park.
His idea was to bring large grazers back and see whether they would bring back the grasslands.
He and, eventually, Nikita fenced in wild horses and later trucked in yaks and sheep from Lake Baikal.
This past spring Nikita hauled in 12 bison from Denmark, traveling 9, 000 miles across Russia by truck and barge.
In 2018 the Zimovs joined forces with Harvard University geneticist George Church, who thinks he essentially can clone a mammoth.
The hope is that one day those now extinct beasts will be stomping around Pleistocene Park, thriving in the Anthropocene.
The park is the ultimate test of Sergey Zimov’s hypothesis—and, he hopes, a hedge against future climate change.
Grasslands, especially when snow covered, reflect more sunlight than does dark forest.
Grazing animals tamp down deep snow, allowing heat to escape the soil.
Both things cool the land.
If wildlife could restore grasslands, it would slow permafrost thaw and thus climate change.
To make a real difference, though, you’d need to unleash thousands of zoos’ worth of animals across millions of acres of the Arctic.
The Zimovs say the evidence from their 36, 000-acre park is promising.
Even with only about a hundred animals, the park’s grasslands stay substantially cooler than the ground in the surrounding area.
The gap between the Zimovs’ ambitions and the reality of the park is unquestionably large.
During a tour one afternoon, Orlinsky and I hiked soggy grasses to a stretch of marsh to watch the horses.
A lone bison hid in the distance.
Nikita loaded us onto an eight-wheel mini-tank and took us crashing through the willows.
After a steep climb we plowed over some skinny larches.
This is why he needs giant herbivores, Nikita said: At the moment I don’t have any animals which can kill those trees.
He spends a lot of time raising funds, most recently in California, hobnobbing with the likes of former Governor Jerry Brown, just to keep this proof of concept going.
The concept has its critics.
Some scientists dispute the Zimovs’ estimates of how many large animals were roaming around Siberia in the Pleistocene, or insist that their theory of ecological change, both past and present, is too simplistic.
Above all, most criticism seems leveled at the Zimovs’ audacity.
Max Holmes of Woods Hole, who knows them well, sees a spark of genius in their work.
The Zimovs are at the fringe, Holmes said, but that’s often where big ideas and big changes originate.
Outside Pleistocene Park, the modern world has responded to the warming Arctic with complacency.
We’ve spent decades ignoring the evidence of climate change and hoping that things won’t get too bad.
We count on technological advances that seem always just out of reach.
And we do this in spite of the fact that climate scientists—permafrost experts in particular—say all signs point to the need for urgent and even audacious action.
The Zimovs are different: They’ve spent their lives battling an unforgiving landscape that rewards bullheadedness.
Is trying to save permafrost by restoring the Arctic steppe, they ask, really so much crazier than counting on humans to quickly retool the world’s energy system?
Maybe we need a little craziness.
Fighting climate change needs multiple actions from multiple different fronts, Nikita said.
Only if we combine them all can we make the future not entirely miserable.
I write for children and for adults.
For about 30 years I have been earning my living through my words, mostly by making things up and writing them down.
It is obviously in my interest for people to read, for them to read fiction, for libraries and librarians to exist and help foster a love of reading and places in which reading can occur.
So I’m biased as a writer.
And I’m here giving this talk tonight, under the auspices of the Reading Agency: a charity whose mission is to give everyone an equal chance in life by helping people become confident and enthusiastic readers.
Which supports literacy programs, and libraries and individuals and nakedly and wantonly encourages the act of reading.
Because, they tell us, everything changes when we read.
And it’s that change, and that act of reading that I’m here to talk about tonight.
I want to talk about what reading does.
What it’s good for.
I was once in New York, and I listened to a talk about the building of private prisons - a huge growth industry in America.
The prison industry needs to plan its future growth - how many cells are they going to need?
How many prisoners are there going to be, 15 years from now?
And they found they could predict it very easily, using a pretty simple algorithm, based on asking what percentage of 10 and 11-year-olds couldn’t read.
And certainly couldn’t read for pleasure.
It’s not one to one: you can’t say that a literate society has no criminality.
But there are very real correlations.
And I think some of those correlations, the simplest, come from something very simple.
Literate people read fiction.
Fiction has two uses.
Firstly, it’s a gateway drug to reading.
The drive to know what happens next, to want to turn the page, the need to keep going, even if it’s hard, because someone’s in trouble and you have to know how it’s all going to end that’s a very real drive.
And it forces you to learn new words, to think new thoughts, to keep going.
To discover that reading per se is pleasurable.
Once you learn that, you ’re on the road to reading everything.
And reading is key.
There were noises made briefly, a few years ago, about the idea that we were living in a post-literate world, in which the ability to make sense out of written words was somehow redundant, but those days are gone: words are more important than they ever were: we navigate the world with words, and as the world slips onto the web, we need to follow, to communicate and to comprehend what we are reading.
People who cannot understand each other cannot exchange ideas, cannot communicate, and translation programs only go so far.
The simplest way to make sure that we raise literate children is to teach them to read, and to show them that reading is a pleasurable activity.
And that means, at its simplest, finding books that they enjoy, giving them access to those books, and letting them read them.
I don’t think there is such a thing as a bad book for children.
Every now and again it becomes fashionable among some adults to point at a subset of children’s books, a genre, perhaps, or an author, and to declare them bad books, books that children should be stopped from reading.
I’ve seen it happen over and over; Enid Blyton was declared a bad author, so was RL Stine, so were dozens of others.
Comics have been decried as fostering illiteracy.
It’s tosh.
It’s snobbery and it’s foolishness.
There are no bad authors for children, that children like and want to read and seek out, because every child is different.
They can find the stories they need to, and they bring themselves to stories.
A hackneyed, worn-out idea isn’t hackneyed and worn out to them.
This is the first time the child has encountered it.
Do not discourage children from reading because you feel they are reading the wrong thing.
Fiction you do not like is a route to other books you may prefer.
And not everyone has the same taste as you.
Well-meaning adults can easily destroy a child’s love of reading: stop them reading what they enjoy, or give them worthy-but-dull books that you like, the 21st-century equivalents of Victorian improving” literature.
You’ll wind up with a generation convinced that reading is uncool and worse, unpleasant.
We need our children to get onto the reading ladder: anything that they enjoy reading will move them up, rung by rung, into literacy.
(Also, do not do what this author did when his 11-year-old daughter was into RL Stine, which is to go and get a copy of Stephen King’s Carrie, saying if you liked those you’ll love this!
Holly read nothing but safe stories of settlers on prairies for the rest of her teenage years, and still glares at me when Stephen King’s name is mentioned).
And the second thing fiction does is to build empathy.
When you watch TV or see a film, you are looking at things happening to other people.
Prose fiction is something you build up from 26 letters and a handful of punctuation marks, and you, and you alone, using your imagination, create a world and people it and look out through other eyes.
You get to feel things, visit places and worlds you would never otherwise know.
You learn that everyone else out there is a me, as well.
You’re being someone else, and when you return to your own world, you’re going to be slightly changed.
Empathy is a tool for building people into groups, for allowing us to function as more than self-obsessed individuals.
You’re also finding out something as you read vitally important for making your way in the world.
And it’s this: The world doesn’t have to be like this.
Things can be different.
I was in China in 2007, at the first party-approved science fiction and fantasy convention in Chinese history.
What had changed?
It’s simple, he told me.
The Chinese were brilliant at making things if other people brought them the plans.
But they did not innovate and they did not invent.
They did not imagine.
So they sent a delegation to the US, to Apple, to Microsoft, to Google, and they asked the people there who were inventing the future about themselves.
And they found that all of them had read science fiction when they were boys or girls.
Fiction can show you a different world.
It can take you somewhere you’ve never been.
Once you’ve visited other worlds, like those who ate fairy fruit, you can never be entirely content with the world that you grew up in.
Discontent is a good thing: discontented people can modify and improve their worlds, leave them better, leave them different.
And while we’re on the subject, I’d like to say a few words about escapism.
I hear the term bandied about as if it’s a bad thing.
As if escapist” fiction is a cheap opiate used by the muddled and the foolish and the deluded, and the only fiction that is worthy, for adults or for children, is mimetic fiction, mirroring the worst of the world the reader finds herself in.
If you were trapped in an impossible situation, in an unpleasant place, with people who meant you ill, and someone offered you a temporary escape, why wouldn’t you take it?
And escapist fiction is just that: fiction that opens a door, shows the sunlight outside, gives you a place to go where you are in control, are with people you want to be with(and books are real places, make no mistake about that); and more importantly, during your escape, books can also give you knowledge about the world and your predicament, give you weapons, give you armour: real things you can take back into your prison.
Skills and knowledge and tools you can use to escape for real.
As JRR Tolkien reminded us, the only people who inveigh against escape are jailers.
I was lucky.
I had an excellent local library growing up.
I had the kind of parents who could be persuaded to drop me off in the library on their way to work in summer holidays, and the kind of librarians who did not mind a small, unaccompanied boy heading back into the children’s library every morning and working his way through the card catalogue, looking for books with ghosts or magic or rockets in them, looking for vampires or detectives or witches or wonders.
And when I had finished reading the children’s’ library I began on the adult books.
They were good librarians.
They liked books and they liked the books being read.
They taught me how to order books from other libraries on inter-library loans.
They had no snobbery about anything I read.
They just seemed to like that there was this wide-eyed little boy who loved to read, and would talk to me about the books I was reading, they would find me other books in a series, they would help.
They treated me as another reader - nothing less or more - which meant they treated me with respect.
I was not used to being treated with respect as an eight- year-old.
They are about education (which is not a process that finishes the day we leave school or university), about entertainment, about making safe spaces, and about access to information.
I worry that here in the 21st century people misunderstand what libraries are and the purpose of them.
If you perceive a library as a shelf of books, it may seem antiquated or outdated in a world in which most, but not all, books in print exist digitally.
But that is to miss the point fundamentally.
I think it has to do with nature of information.
Information has value, and the right information has enormous value.
For all of human history, we have lived in a time of information scarcity, and having the needed information was always important, and always worth something: when to plant crops, where to find things, maps and histories and stories - they were always good for a meal and company.
Information was a valuable thing, and those who had it or could obtain it could charge for that service.
In the last few years, we’ve moved from an information-scarce economy to one driven by an information glut.
According to Eric Schmidt of Google, every two days now the human race creates as much information as we did from the dawn of civilisation until 2003.
That’s about five exobytes of data a day, for those of you keeping score.
The challenge becomes, not finding that scarce plant growing in the desert, but finding a specific plant growing in a jungle.
We are going to need help navigating that information to find the thing we actually need.
Libraries are places that people go to for information.
Books are only the tip of the information iceberg: they are there, and libraries can provide you freely and legally with books.
More children are borrowing books from libraries than ever before - books of all kinds: paper and digital and audio.
But libraries are also, for example, places that people, who may not have computers, who may not have internet connections, can go online without paying anything: hugely important when the way you find out about jobs, apply for jobs or apply for benefits is increasingly migrating exclusively online.
Librarians can help these people navigate that world.
I do not believe that all books will or should migrate onto screens: as Douglas Adams once pointed out to me, more than 20 years before the Kindle turned up, a physical book is like a shark.
Sharks are old: there were sharks in the ocean before the dinosaurs.
