The Last Night
No evidence survives to suggest the Romanovs reacted with anything but docility.
Carrying the tsarevitch in his arms, Nicholas led the family and the four servants—family doctor Eugene Botkin, maid Anna Demidova, chef Ivan Kharitonov, and footman Alexei Trupp—down to the cellar.
Chairs were fetched for Alexandra and Alexei while the others stood.
Yurovsky approached them, with the executioners behind him in the doorway, and read from a prepared statement to the astonished prisoners:
The presidium of the Regional Soviet, fulfilling the will of the Revolution, has decreed that the former Tsar Nicholas Romanov, guilty of countless bloody crimes against the people, should be shot.
When he finished, they began firing on the family.
Accounts are conflicting, but most say that the tsar was the main target, and that he died from several gunshots.
The tsarina died from a bullet to the head.
As the room filled with gun smoke, discipline among the killers vanished.
The grand duchesses seemed unharmed by the bullets, which had ricocheted off their bodies (it was later discovered that diamond jewelry sewn into their clothing had acted like armor during the initial assault).
One of the murderers—a drunkard named Ermakov—lost all control and began to slash at the Romanovs with a bayonet.
Finally, after a horror-filled 20 minutes, the entire family and their servants were all dead: shot, stabbed, and beaten.
The 11 bodies were hauled out of the house and loaded onto a truck.
The disposal of the remains was chaotic.
Scholars believe the bodies were first dumped in a shallow mine called Ganina Yama, which the Bolsheviks tried to collapse with grenades.
The shaft stayed intact, so the bodies were hastily removed.
On the way to the new burial site, the truck got mired in mud, and two bodies—now believed to be Alexei and Maria—were removed and disposed of in the forest.
The nine other bodies were burned, doused with acid, and buried in a separate grave not too far away.
Rumors that some of the Romanovs had survived their execution arose almost immediately after their deaths.
Because their bodies remained undiscovered for decades and Communist authorities were coy about the events at the Ipatiev House, these whispers grew into legends.
All of the Romanov children were impersonated at one time or another, but Anastasia was at the center of the most notorious claims to the Romanov estate.
Perhaps the most famous claimant was a woman rescued from a Berlin canal in 1920.
Admitted to the hospital, and carrying no identification, she reluctantly told the authorities she was Anastasia Romanov and recounted a detailed story of how she had escaped the slaughter.
She later moved to the United States, where she went by the name Anna Anderson and continued claiming she was Anastasia until her death in 1984.
Although it is generally believed Anderson was a mentally ill Polish factory worker, her extraordinary story became the subject of public fascination, and the inspiration for the 1956 movie Anastasia starring Ingrid Bergman as the lost grand duchess.
When the last of the Romanov remains were identified in 2008, any lingering hopes that some might have survived were put to rest.
Truth Comes Out
After the Romanov family’s murder, Soviet officials were cagey when addressing the topic.
Even shortly after the Bolsheviks announced Nicholas’s death, they were claiming that Alexandra and Alexei were alive in a safe place.
The deaths would not be officially confirmed until 1926, and even then the Soviets refused to accept responsibility for the execution.
Josef Stalin officially suppressed discussion of the family’s fate in 1938, and the Ipatiev House was demolished in 1977 as Soviets decreed it had no historical value.
The forced silence surrounding the Romanovs’ fate may have quelled open discussion, but it fueled unending curiosity.
Royal imposters would spring up in the coming decades, most claiming to be one of the tsar’s children.
Each time a new claimant appeared, the story would be resurrected, making it impossible for the mystery to die as the Soviets hoped it would.
In 1979 a pair of amateur sleuths found the larger burial site near Yekaterinburg, but the find was kept secret until after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
As a new revolution spread through Russia, scientists returned to Yekaterinburg in 1991 to reclaim history.
They exhumed the remains of nine people, who were later scientifically identified as Nicholas, Alexandra, Olga, Tatiana, Anastasia, and their four servants.
Finding their bones began a healing process in which both the horrors of their deaths and their places in history could be acknowledged.
In 1998 these remains were laid to rest in St. Petersburg’s Sts. Peter and Paul Cathedral, traditional burial place of the tsars.
In 2000 the Russian Orthodox Church canonized Nicholas, Alexandra, and their children as passion-bearers. At Ganina Yama—the first place where Bolsheviks tried to dispose of the bodies— the Russian Orthodox Church erected a monastery.
Where the Ipatiev House once stood, the magnificent Church on the Blood was consecrated in 2003 and has since become a pilgrimage site.
In 2007 Alexei’s and Maria’s remains were found, and later identified using DNA analysis.
It has been said that families who are closely attached may cut themselves off from the outside world.
So it was with the Romanovs.
Their self-absorption made them slow to appreciate their danger, but their love strengthened each other and made their confinement bearable.
It was the greatest mercy of their last months that, right up to the terrible end, they were, at the very least, all together.
It was during the first snowstorm of the new year.
The color green was something you saw in pictures tacked to the wall or in a memory from what felt like years ago.
I was living alone in a studio apartment in a shitty section of west Cleveland.
There were no stairs to get to my apartment.
I was as far down as you can get without going under.
I slept in the same room as the oven, but I liked the smallness of it.
When I was young my sister and I used to zip each other into suitcases.
We would drag the suitcases up and down the stairs, and all around the living room, laughing hysterically.
That first morning I wrapped a scarf around my neck and lit the stove.
I tripped over my shoes on my way to the sink to fill the pot.
I looked down at them accusingly, as if anyone but me could have put them there. I looked up after kicking them across the room and that was when I saw him for the first time.
I wouldn't find out until later that he had been there for weeks.
Inches away from me as I slept. An arm's reach as I showered and dressed each morning.
He sat with me while I overcooked my eggs and searched the internet for a cat to adopt, each time deciding against it because I could imagine it snowballing into two or three until I became one of those women.
The outside world that day, and every day since I had been living there, was a white swirling mixture of ground and sky.
Set against the bright seamless backdrop was the outline of a man.
He was fading in and out with each gust of wind, like a Polaroid gone backwards.
But I saw him.
I saw the tip of one of his pink fingers poking out of a hole in his glove.
His hands were up against his mouth which was covered in a thick dark beard and his breath came in a long slow billow of white smoke, like the mouth of a gutter under a frozen street.
His hood was pulled up over his head which made his eyes ever brighter in the shadow.
I couldn't tell what color they were, but they seemed to have a reflection inside them like the round outline of a flashbulb in the eye of a magazine model.
I didn't scream.
I felt nothing like adrenaline, or dread. Or that feeling when your heart beats so fast it makes you want to throw up.
Nothing like that happened.
If someone told me that they saw a strange man staring at them through their window I would have expected to hear them say, And then I screamed and dropped my glass and it shattered and I ran to the phone and dialed 911andthen I ran to my front door and pulled the deadbolt acrossand then I hid in the bathroom with the doorclosedand I couldn't stop shaking.
But I didn't do any of that.
I stood completely still as if someone was holding me there, and I watched as the man I saw so clearly disappeared into the endless white.
There was nothing in my apartment that anyone would want.
My possessions were piled in and out of boxes and I didn't even own a real bed.
I had a mattress on the floor that tripled as a couch and dining room table.
I did own a laptop but I took it with me to work.
I didn't own a TV, or a toaster oven, or even a decent pair of shoes.
I just decided that since there was nothing for him to steal, and I was sure he figured that out if he took a good look, that I would go on about my day despite his strange appearance outside my window.
And that is exactly how it ended up.
Each morning while I boiled water and ladled my mug into the steaming pot, I saw him.
I didn't own a tea kettle either.
I didn't see why people spent money on things like that when they could function perfectly well without them.
But anyway, each night when I came home from work and my apartment was dark and quiet and anyone would think that I should be scared, I wasn't.
There was no one waiting for me behind the shower curtain.
Nothing was ever out of place.
There were never any footprints circling my apartment, or scratch marks around my doorknob.
I came and went peacefully and each morning I shared a moment with a stranger whose eye brows curled up like a puppy and whose fingers were always bent across his mouth.
It went on for about a week that way.
I continued to start my car ten minutes early with the keys dangling in the ignition, so it could thaw.
I guess in hindsight that was a pretty stupid thing to do in west Cleveland anyway, random man or not.
But I mean I just lived my life normally, with the exception of my gloomy window friend stopping by more and more often.
Once while I was watching TV late at night, something caught my eye at the window.
Of course it was him.
I just kept on eating my popcorn until I was full and there was still half a bowl left.
I hated to waste food, and I always felt bad for the little birds that hopped over the snow, and wondered what the hell they ate in this neighborhood at twelve below.
So sometimes I would throw food outside for them. Or for the squirrels.
So I went to the window.
I had never really…confronted the man.
I got up and saw his outline like the moon must have been fat and shining right behind him, casting a line of white around his face.
I put my face into the cold, that kind of cold that feels more like fire than ice, and I looked for him.
The snow was covered in a layer of glass.
I threw the leftover popcorn and it rolled like dice across the ground.
There were no signs of his tracks.
I noticed, as I pulled the window back down, that there was no moon that night.
The next morning I saw the white grey billows of exhaust fumes pouring out of a piece of shit station wagon in front of my apartment.
I saw the woman's eyes, and they were glossy and dull.
I had seen her baby basset hound eyebrows before, on the man at my window.
She just stared at the door as if she was waiting for someone to come out.
It happened that way three times.
Not all at once, but spread so far out across two weeks that I had to keep reminding myself that it wasn't a déjà vu, and that yes, this had really happened before.
The fourth time I decided had to be different.
Something about her felt so much like the man at my window, but maybe it was just her coming and going. And her staring. And those eyebrows arching up.
But her hands were not covering her mouth; they were white and exposed even in this weather, and they were gripping the steering wheel.
So I could see that her lips were moving tightly against each other, and on top of each other, pulling in and out of her mouth.
This fourth time she didn't drive away when I walked out onto the ice.
I stood waiting for her to do it; to drive away as she always had.
But she just looked ahead at the road, and then back into my face.
Then I saw her hand move to the door, and the window rolled down.
So I did ask her that, because I wasn't sure what else to say.
The wind stole the words and spread them out across the trees and the pavement and the kicked over silver trash cans.
She said nothing.
She looked like she might drive away again.
She put her hands back on the wheel and looked straight ahead.
But then she turned and looked past me at my apartment.
I looked back then too, like maybe I was missing something.
She was looking at the right side of the house, at the space between it and the neighbor's fence, which was all of four feet.
It was the space where I saw my window friend each morning standing, waiting to watch me curse at my hair for making me late.
Are you looking for him? I asked.
Feeling as soon as I said it, the longing to take it back.
I wasn't sure what I would say if she asked Who?
Oh, just that man who stares in my window every day.
The one who for all I know could be a serial killer casing out his next victim.
I know that's what people would think if I told them.
But it didn't feel like that at all.
But she didn't ask me who, she didn't say anything for about a minute, she just stared blankly back and forth between me and the apartment, and I knew that I would be late for work again.
She looked like she was about to say something, her mouth kept moving and tears starting falling into it from her eyes.
I remembered the landlord speaking to me in broken English, telling me how grateful he was that he didn't need to help me carry furniture.
Do you need help? I asked, coming a little closer to the window.
She just kept crying, harder now.
I squeezed my cell phone for the time and saw that I was still early.
I always turned my car on too soon, and by the time I got inside it the snow was pouring from the roof like rain.
Or maybe you just want to talk?
Is that why you keep coming here? I just kept talking.
I didn't know what else to do with her.
What's your name?
I just moved here a few weeks ago, actually I guess it's been more than a month.
I don't know anyone.
I work downtown at a magazine. I do graphic design.
She started to calm down a little and looked at me.
Amy, she said quietly.
Hey Amy, I said, a little too cheerfully.
I'm Ellen.
Is this where you used to live? I said, pointing back at my little faded blue apartment and the trees, and the trash cans that were glued to the sidewalk now from all the ice.
She stared at the apartment and nodded at it, as if it had asked her the question.
Well, did you want to come in for a little while?
I can't stay long, I do have to go soon, but you can come in for a few minutes if you want.
I know when I moved from my first house I always wanted to go back and see what they did to my old room.
See if they painted it a different color or anything.
I didn't paint anything yet.
Maybe I will in the summer.
I smiled at her, and she smiled back slowly, as if her face had forgotten which muscles it took to pull up the chapped corners of her mouth.
She stared at the house, and then at me and then back at the house again, and without saying anything she unlocked her seat belt and got out of the car.
We were standing there in the middle of the frozen street, her car was still running and dripping fluid, making a little puddle that was curling and flowing over the cracks in the ice and the dirty solid snow that was pushed up onto the curb.
Did you want to…? I motioned to the keys hanging in the ignition.
It was alright for me to leave my car running, but if hers got stolen I would feel pretty terrible.
Oh, yeah, thanks, she said softly.
I watched her lean into her car and shut it off, pull the keys out and put them in the pocket of her coat.
When she turned to face me again I smiled a sort of awkward, ok right this way, kind of smile, and turned to walk to the apartment.
She followed me hesitantly and I heard her take in a deep breath.
The cold air must have stung her lungs because she started coughing.
You ok? I said, turning to look at her over my shoulder as I opened the door and walked in.
She just nodded, and I saw her eyebrows start to go higher, and her lips start to pull into her mouth.
I wasn't sure if this was such a great idea after all.
What was I supposed to do with some strange sobbing woman?
I remembered that I didn't have anywhere for her to sit, and it felt like an even worse idea.
I took in a deep breath of the frozen air as we walked into the apartment.
She was my first guest and I was suddenly a little self conscious about my housekeeping.
I scooped up the cold soggy tea bags from the counter and threw them in the trash, and moved a few things aroundso I didn't look like a slob.
Do you want some tea?
Or hot chocolate maybe?
I don't have a coffee maker.
I grabbed two mugs before she could answer, refilled the pot that was on the stove, and started it to boil.
She didn't say anything, and I looked behind me to see her standing in what I guess had been her living room, looking around the apartment like Dorothy when she came out of her little spinning cabin.
I think I feel like some hot chocolate, I said, trying to break her from her daze.
She stared at me as if she had forgotten where she was.
Sure, she said finally.
I attempted small talk, mostly to myself, while the water boiled.