BALCO showed that drug testing was a farce.
Above, former track star Marion Jones pauses while speaking to the waiting media at Federal Court after pleading guilty to lying to a federal agent about her drug use.
She tested positive for THG and was stripped of five medals won at the 2000 Summer Olympics.
The Tour de France, the oldest and most prestigious race in cycling, has been riven by scandal since drug testing was introduced.
In 1998, for example, a car full of performance- enhancing drugs belonging to the French Festina cycling team was found before the race.
All nine Festina riders confessed to using erythropoietin (EPO, a hormone that stimulates red blood cell production and is taken to increase stamina).
A resulting investigation cast suspicion of systemic doping on many teams of the Tour de France; several withdrew from the race.
American Floyd Landis initially won the 2006 Tour de France, but after his Stage 17 victory, his urine twice tested positive for banned synthetic testosterone and he was stripped of the win.
Another American, Lance Armstrong, was number one in the world in 1996, the same year he recovered from testicular cancer.
In 2005, after winning his seventh Tour de France, he was accused of doping; that his teammates had been caught taking EPO gave weight to the accusations.
In 2012, he was stripped of his Tour de France titles since 1998.
The next year, Armstrong admitted to doping in a televised interview with Oprah Winfrey.
Above, Floyd Landis, winner of the 2006 Tour de France, listens during the hearing at Pepperdine University in 2007 at which he was accused of doping.
How did Lance Armstrong elude drug testing for much of his career?
One strategy was simply running away and hiding when drug testers came calling.
Professional cyclists must let their national antidoping agencies know of their whereabouts at all times, but as long as they accurately reported the cities they were in, they were not reprimanded for being unavailable.
Armstrong often received advanced warning that he was to be tested and changed his travel plans or stayed in remote locales, which made tracking him down a challenge.
He also used sophisticated techniques to thwart testers.
In one, drug masking, an infusion of saline was used to return his blood values to normal levels.
And he used drugs that were untraceable, such as EPO, for which there was no test in the 1990s, when he began to take it.
When a test was developed, Armstrong found that injecting small doses into a vein rather than subcutaneously produced a negative result.
You'd need to be a researcher at the National Institutes of Health to understand how he did it, says Dr Yesalis.
It was that sophisticated.
Above, on January 14, 2013, Lance Armstrong speaks to Oprah Winfrey regarding the controversy surrounding his cycling career.
Biogenesis of America, a health clinic specializing in weight loss and hormone replacement therapy, operated briefly in Coral Gables, Florida.
In 2013, the same year that Lance Armstrong confessed all to Oprah, a scandal erupted when several Major League Baseball players were accused of obtaining human growth hormone from Biogenesis.
Thirteen players received suspensions of 50 games or more, including Alex Rodriguez, Antonio Bastardo, Everth Cabrera, Francisco Cervelli, Nelson Cruz, Fautino de los Santos, Sergio Escalona, Fernando Martínez, Jesús Montero, Jordan Norberto, Jhonny Peralta, César Puello, and Jordany Valdespin—the most simultaneous suspensions in baseball history.
Above, New York Yankees third baseman Alex Rodriguez addresses the media in 2013 while facing suspension by Major League Baseball for his alleged use of steroids made by the Biogenesis clinic in Florida.
By many accounts, drug use in elite athletes is not just common, it's pervasive.
In a 2015 Cycling Independent Reform Commission report, one expert estimated that 90% of professional cyclists take performance-enhancing drugs.
That same year, Kenya's Rita Jeptoo, a three-time Boston Marathon champion, was banned from competition for 2 years after testing positive for EPO.
Also in 2015, a report commissioned by World Anti-Doping Agency indicated a deeply rooted culture of cheating at all levels in Russian sport.
In March 2016, Russian tennis star Maria Sharapova admitted to failing a drug test.
She had been taking meldonium, which is used to treat ischemia but can also improve endurance.
She was suspended from competition for 2 years.
On July 21, 2016, Russia's entire track and field team was banned by the IAAF from competing in the Rio Olympics for taking state-endorsed steroids.
Other countries are also believed to sponsor such programs.
Above, New York Yankees pitchers Roger Clemens and Andy Pettitte, accused in the 2007 Mitchell Report of taking amphetamines, anabolic steroids, and human growth hormone (HGH).
Pettitte later admitted to taking HGH.
Clemens denied ever taking drugs.
On July 24, less than 2 weeks before the start of the Rio Games, the IOC ruled against barring Russia across the board from the Rio Olympics, even though, as the New York Times noted, the World Anti-Doping Agency confirmed beyond a reasonable doubt that the Russian government ran the biggest criminal doping program in the history of international sport, demeaning every notion of what athletic competition stands for.
Instead, the IOC will defer to 28 individual federations that govern each sport regarding whether to let Russian athletes compete in their disciplines.
While the IAAF has ruled that Russia's track and field team will be banned from Rio, many sports federations, among them gymnastics and tennis, have declared that Russian athletes should be allowed to compete.
Above, the Russian flag.
Dr Yesalis has testified before Congress multiple times on legislation related to the control of anabolic steroid and growth hormone abuse by athletes.
What can we do about this?
Not a damn thing, he concludes.
It's not enough for them to watch the Olympics or any elite sporting event to see the very best.
They want bigger-than-life people doing bigger-than-life things.
They don't want to see an average-looking guy or gal who's a gifted athlete.
They want people who don't look normal.
They want characters out of Marvel Comics.
Drugs allow that.
Above, New York Jets safety LaRon Landry, who weighs 226 pounds and can reportedly bench 503 pounds, is one of the smaller guys in the National Football League.
Why your internet habits are not as clean as you think.

The internet allows us to send messages, share pictures, download music and stream videos at a touch of a button, but our online habits have a surprising impact on the environment.
It’s probable you’ve already replied to a couple of emails today, sent some chat messages and maybe performed a quick internet search.
As the day wears on you will doubtless spend even more time browsing online, uploading images, playing music and streaming video.
Each of these activities you perform online comes with a small cost – a few grams of carbon dioxide are emitted due to the energy needed to run your devices and power the wireless networks you access.
Less obvious, but perhaps even more energy intensive, are the data centres and vast servers needed to support the internet and store the content we access over it.
Although the energy needed for a single internet search or email is small, approximately 4.1 billion people, or 53.6 % of the global population, now use the internet.
Those scraps of energy, and the associated greenhouse gases emitted with each online activity, can add up.
The carbon footprint of our gadgets, the internet and the systems supporting them account for about 3.7% of global greenhouse emissions, according to some estimates.
It is similar to the amount produced by the airline industry globally, explains Mike Hazas, a researcher at Lancaster University.
And these emissions are predicted to double by 2025.
If we were to rather crudely divide the 1.7 billion tonnes (1.6 billion tons) of greenhouse gas emissions estimated to be produced in the manufacture and running of digital technologies between all internet users around the world, it means each of us is responsible for 414kg (912lbs) of carbon dioxide a year.
But things are not that simple – this figure can vary depending where in the world you are.
Internet users in some parts of the globe will have a disproportionately large footprint.
One study estimated that 10 years ago, the average Australian internet user was responsible for the equivalent of 81kg (179lbs) of carbon dioxide (CO2) being emitted into the atmosphere.
Improvements in energy efficiency, economies of scale and use of renewable energy will doubtless have reduced this, but it is clear that people in developed nations still account for the majority of the internet’s carbon footprint.
(CO2 is a unit used to express the carbon footprint of all greenhouse gases together as if they were all emitted as carbon dioxide).
For some, the realisation that their online activity is harming the planet has spurred them into taking action.
Anything we can do to reduce carbon emissions is important, no matter how small, and that includes how we behave on the internet, says Philippa Gaut, a teacher from Surrey, UK.
She is one of a growing number of eco-conscious consumers trying to reduce their environmental impact online and on their phones.
If everybody made changes, it would have more impact, she adds.
One of the difficulties in working out the carbon footprint of our internet habits is that few people can agree on what they should and should not include.
Should it include the emissions that come from manufacturing the computing hardware?
And what about those from the staff and buildings of technology companies?

Even the figures around the running of data centres are disputed – many run on renewable energy, while some companies buy carbon off-sets to clean up their energy use.
While many companies claim to power their data centre’s using renewable energy, in some parts of the world they are still largely powered from the burning of fossil fuels.
In the US, data centres are responsible for 2% of the country’s electricity use, while globally they account for just under 200 terawatt Hours (TWh) .
According to the United Nation’s International Telecommunications Union, however, this figure has flatlined in recent years despite rising internet traffic and workloads.
This is largely because of improved energy efficiency and the move to centralise data centres into giant facilities.
But while many companies claim to power their data centre’s using renewable energy, in some parts of the world they are still largely powered from the burning of fossil fuels.
And it can be difficult for consumers to choose which data centres they want to use.
Many of the major cloud providers, however, have pledged to cut their carbon emissions, so storing photos, documents and running services off their servers where possible is one approach to take.
As an individual, simply upgrading our equipment less often is one way of cutting the carbon footprint of our digital technology.
The greenhouse gases emitted while manufacturing and transporting these devices can make up a considerable portion of the lifetime emissions from a piece of electronics.
One study at the University of Edinburgh found that extending the time you use a single computer and monitors from four to six years could avoid the equivalent of 190kg of carbon emissions.
We can also alter the way we use our gadgets to cut our digital carbon footprints.
One of the easiest ways is to switch they way we send messages.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the footprint of an email also varies dramatically, from 0.3 g CO2 for a spam email to 4g (0.14oz) CO2 for a regular email and 50g (1.7oz) CO2 for one with a photo or hefty attachment, according to Mike Berners-Lee, a fellow at Lancaster University who researches carbon footprints.
These figures, however, were crunched by Berners-Lee 10 years ago.
Charlotte Freitag, a carbon footprint expert at Small World Consulting, the company founded by Berners-Lee, says the impact of emailing may have gone up.
We think the footprint per message might be higher today because of the bigger phones people are using, she says.
Based on the older figures, some people have estimated that their own emails will generate 1.6kg (3.5lb) CO2 in a single day .
Berners-Lee himself also calculated that a typical business user creates 135kg (298lbs) CO2 from sending emails every year, which is the equivalent of driving 200 miles in a family car.
But it should also be easy to cut this down.

By simply stopping unnecessary niceties such as thank you emails we could collectively save a lot of carbon emissions.
If every adult in the UK sent one less thank you email, it could save 16, 433 tonnes of carbon a year – the equivalent to taking 3, 334 diesel cars off the road, according to energy company, OVO.
While the carbon footprint of an email isn’t huge, it’s a great illustration of the broader principle that cutting the waste out of our lives is good for our wellbeing and good for the environment, Berners-Lee says.
Swapping email attachments for links to documents and not sending messages to multiple recipients are another easy way to reduce our digital carbon footprints, as well as unsubscribing from mailing lists we no longer read.
I unsubscribed from automatically generated newsletters, as when I learned about the carbon footprint from emails, I was horrified, says Gaut.
Now, I’m careful not to send out my email to new websites… it’s made me consider the impact more.
According to estimates by antispam service Cleanfox, the average user receives 2, 850 unwanted emails every year from subscriptions, which are responsible for 28.5kg (63lbs) CO2.

If every adult in the UK sent one less thank you email, it could save 16, 433 tonnes of carbon a year – the equivalent to taking 3, 334 diesel cars off the road.
Choosing to send an SMS text message is the perhaps the most environmentally-friendly alternative as a way of staying in touch because each text generates just 0.014g of CO2.
A tweet is estimated to have a footprint of 0.2g CO2 (although Twitter did not respond to requests to confirm this figure) while sending a message via a private messaging app such as WhatsApp or FacebookMessenger is estimated by Freitag to be only slightly less carbon intensive than sending an email.
Again this can depend on what you are sending – gifs, emojis and images have a greater footprint than plain text.
The carbon footprint of making a one-minute mobile phone call is a little higher than sending a text, according to Freitag, but making video calls over the internet is much higher.
But it is important to remember where it replaces travel to reach meetings, it can be far better for the environment.
The same study found the video conferencing produced just 7% of the emissions of meeting in person.
Another study found the impact of a car ride exceeds the impact of a video conference at less than 20km.
Internet searching is another tricky area.
A decade ago, each internet search had a footprint of 0.2g CO2, according to figures released by Google.
Today, Google uses a mixture of renewable energy and carbon offsetting to reduce the carbon footprint of its operations, while Microsoft, which owns the Bing search engine, has promised to become carbon negative by 2030, and efforts are underway to investigate whether this footprint is now higher or lower.
According to Google’s own figures, however, an average user of its services – someone who performs 25 searches each day, watches 60 minutes of YouTube, has a Gmail account and accesses some of its other services – produces less than 8g (0.28oz) CO2 a day.
Newer search engines, however, are attempting to set themselves apart as greener options from the outset.

Ecosia, for example, says it will plant a tree for every 45 searches it performs.
This sort of carbon offsetting can help to remove carbon from the atmosphere , but the success of these projects often depends on how long the trees grow for and what happens to them when they are chopped down.
Regardless of the search engine you choose, using the web to find information is more sustainable than browsing in books.
In fact, a paperback’s carbon footprint is around 1kg (2.2lbs) CO2, while a weekend newspaper accounts for between 0.3kg (10oz) and 4.1kg (9lbs) CO2 making reading the news online more environmentally friendly than poring over a paper.
But you could still read a lifetime of paperbacks – 2, 300 to be precise – for the same carbon footprint as a flight from London to Hong Kong, so don’t feel too guilty for reading the next best seller.
(Read more about how to reduce the impact your flights have on the environment.)
Those who have been tempted by cryptocurrencies might also want to think carefully about the environmental impact of the transactions they conduct.
Vast amounts of computing power are needed for the so-called proof of work algorithm that is used to validate transactions on Blockchain's distributed ledger system.
One recent study estimated that BitCoin alone is responsible for around 22m tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions every year – greater than all the carbon footprint of the whole of Jordan.
Watching online videos accounts for the biggest chunk of the world's internet traffic – 60% – and generates 300m tonnes of carbon dioxide a year, which is roughly 1% of global emissions, according to French think tank, The Shift Project.
If you flip on your television to watch Netflix, around half the power goes into powering the TV and half the energy goes into powering Netflix, says Lancaster University’s Mike Hazas.
Some experts, however, insist that the energy needed to store and stream videos is less than more intensive computational activities performed by data centres.

Some of the climate pollution that comes from internet use also comes from some rather dirty browsing.
Pornography accounts for a third of video streaming traffic , generating as much carbon dioxide as Belgium in a year.
On-demand video services such as Amazon Prime and Netflix account for another third while the final third of the video streaming carbon footprint includes watching YouTube and clips on social media.
Netflix says its total global energy consumption reached 451, 000 megawatt hours per year, which is enough to power 37, 000 homes , but insists it purchases renewable energy certificates and carbon offsets to compensate for any energy that comes from fossil fuel sources.
Streaming and downloading music also has an impact.
Rabih Bashroush, a researcher at the University of East London and lead scientist at the European Commission-funded Eureca project, calculated that five billion plays clocked up by just one music video – the hit 2017 song Despacito – consumed as much electricity as Chad, Guinea-Bissau, Somalia, Sierra Leone and the Central African Republic put together in a single year.
The total emissions for streaming that song could be over 250, 000 tonnes of carbon dioxide, he says.
However, Hazas points out that some YouTube views are unintentional.
A study led by his colleague Kelly Widdicks analysed streaming habits and found that some viewers use YouTube as background noise, and sometimes even fall asleep, generating carbon for no gain.
Cutting back on these uses or stopping video from playing unintentionally on an open browser when you are not watching, could help keep your carbon footprint down.
Fiddling with autoplay settings and switching from high definition to a lower resolution when it’s not necessary can also make a difference.
Hazas says the most efficient way to see your favourite programme is by waiting for it to be on terrestrial TV, or choosing to stream it over wi-fi rather than on a mobile network can also make a difference.
Using a phone over a mobile network is at least twice as energy intensive than using it over wi-fi, so if you can wait until you get home to watch YouTube that’s best, he adds.
And, one of the most enjoyable ways to be more environmentally friendly is to watch films and TV together.
On the whole, audio is less problematic, says Hazas, as streaming audio is less energy and carbon intensive than streaming images.
But researchers at the University of Oslo found that environmental impact of listening to music has never been higher, with a footprint of 200,000-350,000 tonnes of CO2 in the US alone for downloading tracks onto MP3 players.
It’s thought emissions for streaming services may be even higher.
However, the number of times you listen to a piece of music can make a difference.
Buying a physical CD or record can be better if you listen to the same album repeatedly, but if you only listen to a piece of music less than 27 times over your lifetime, then streaming can be better.
(Read more about the carbon footprint of streaming music.)
Similarly, the environmental cost of downloading video games is thought to be higher than producing and distributing Blu-Ray disks from shops.
The first attempt to map the energy use of gaming in the US found it produces 24 megatonnes of carbon dioxide a year.
Researchers behind the study at the University of California found US gamers use 2.4% of their household electricity – 32 terawatt hours of energy every year – which is more than freezers or washing machines.
They also showed that streaming games uses more energy, so gaming carbon emissions may worsen as more people adopt games where the computational work is being done remotely rather than on individual consoles, such as with devices like Google’s Stadia.
But Hazas is more optimistic.
The carbon footprint of playing multiplayer games like Fortnite isn’t too bad, he says.
They are designed to be responsive so they don’t require too much data traffic.
For example, you get a position of a character on a map, or the fact someone’s shooting, but it doesn’t take too much data to communicate that.
However, updating games is more carbon intensive.
Flagship games like Fortnite or Call of Duty require lots of updates so you're looking at gigabytes every couple of weeks for downloads, which add new features.

For those who enjoy flicking through their social media, there is some good news.
It is arguably the least carbon intensive form of digital entertainment.
According to Facebook’s sustainability report, a user’s annual carbon footprint is 299g CO2, which is less than boiling the water for a pot of tea.
But if you consider the platform has more than one billion users, that’s a lot of pots of tea.
It’s possible to save carbon by disabling some features for social media and other apps.
We've found that app updates and automatic cloud backups are about 10% of traffic from mobile phones, says Hazas.
So, switching off unnecessary cloud backups and switching off automatic downloads for app updates are good things to do.
But while changes in our personal online behaviour will only take us so far, there also needs to be change within the industry to ensure that carbon emissions can be reduced, says Elizabeth Jardim, a senior corporate campaigner at environmental campaign group Greenpeace.
The IT industry’s greenhouse gas emissions are predicted to reach 14% of global emissions by 2040 but at the same time the UN's International Telecommunication's Union has set the industry the target of reducing its emissions by 45% over the next decade.
It’s more important to make sure the companies building the internet are switching to renewable and phasing out fossil fuels, says Jardim.
That's when searching will be more guilt free.
Let’s imagine planet Earth without viruses.
We wave a wand, and they all disappear.
The rabies virus is suddenly gone.
The polio virus is gone.
The gruesomely lethal Ebola virus is gone.
The measles virus, the mumps virus, and the various influenzas are gone.
Vast reductions of human misery and death.
HIV is gone, and so the AIDS catastrophe never happened.
Nipah and Hendra and Machupo and Sin Nombre are gone — never mind their records of ugly mayhem.
Dengue, gone.
All the rotaviruses, gone, a great me rcy to children in developing countries who die by the hundreds of thousands each year.
Zika virus, gone.
Yellow fever virus, gone.
Herpes B, carried by some monkeys, often fatal when passed to humans, gone.
Nobody suffers anymore from chicken pox, hepatitis, shingles, or even the common cold.
Variola, the agent of smallpox?
That virus was eradicated in the wild by 1977, but now it vanishes from the high - security freezers where the last spooky samples are stored.
The SARS virus of 2003, the alarm that we now know signaled the modern pandemic era, gone.
And of course the nefarious SARS-CoV-2 virus, cause of COVID-19 and so bewilderingly variable in its effects, so tricky, so dangerous, so very transmissible, is gone.
Do you feel better?
Don’t.
This scenario is more equivocal than you think.
The fact is, we live in a world of viruses — viruses that are unfathomably diverse, immeasurably abundant.
The oceans alone may contain more viral particles than stars in the observable universe.
Mammals may carry at least 320, 000 different species of viruses.
When you add the viruses infecting nonmammalian animals, plants, terrestrial bacteria, and every other possible host, the total comes to … lots.
And beyond the big numbers are big consequences: Many of those viruses bring adaptive benefits, not harms, to life on Earth, including human life.
We couldn’t continue without them.
We wouldn’t have arisen from the primordial muck without them.
There are two lengths of DNA that originated from viruses and now reside in the genomes of humans and other primates, for instance, without which — an astonishing fact — pregnancy would be impossible.
There’s viral DNA, nestled among the genes of terrestrial animals, that helps package and store memories — more astonishment — in tiny protein bubbles.
Still other genes co-opted from viruses contribute to the growth of embryos, regulate immune systems, resist cancer — important effects only now beginning to be understood.
Viruses, it turns out, have played crucial roles in triggering major evolutionary transitions.
Eliminate all viruses, as in our thought experiment, and the immense biological diversity gracing our planet would collapse like a beautiful wooden house with every nail abruptly removed.
As a zebra shark cruises by, a diver at Aquarium of the Pacific in Long Beach, California, displays an image of a bacteriophage, a type of virus that infects bacteria.
Harmless to plants and animals, bacteriophages are critical for healthy marine ecosystems.
The Earth’s oceans teem with these and other viruses.
The aquarium’s Tropical Reef Habitat and Soft Coral Garden hold 367, 166 gallons of water, with an estimated 5.32 quadrillion viruses.
If lined up side by side, those viruses would circle the Earth almost eight times.
To count viruses in the Aquarium of the Pacific’s Tropical Reef Habitat and Soft Coral Garden, we enlisted Alexandra Rae Santora, a doctoral student working with Jed Fuhrman, a professor at the University of Southern California.
She ran a sample through a 0.02-micron filter, which catches bacteria and viruses.
She used a DNA-binding stain to make them visible under an epifluorescence microscope.
The larger organisms are bacteria; the dots are viruses.
With a counting grid, she determined the number of viruses in the field of view.
Knowing the filter size and the volume of water allowed her to calculate the population per gallon.
A virus is a parasite, yes, but sometimes that parasitism is more like symbiosis, mutual dependence that profits both visitor and host.
Like fire, viruses are a phenomenon that’s neither in all cases good nor in all cases bad; they can deliver advantage or destruction.
Everything depends: depends on the virus, on the situation, on your point of reference.
They are the dark angels of evolution, terrific and terrible.
That’s what makes them so interesting.
To appreciate the multifariousness of viruses, you need to start with the basics of what they are and what they are not.
It’s easier to say what they are not.
They are not living cells.
A cell, of the sort assembled in great number to make up your body or mine or the body of an octopus or a primrose, contains elaborate machinery for building proteins, packaging energy, and performing other specialized functions — depending on whether that cell happens to be a muscle cell or a xylem cell or a neuron.
A bacterium is also a cell, with similar attributes, though much simpler.
A virus is none of this.
Saying just what a virus is has been complicated enough that definitions have changed over the past 120 - some years.
