As resignation/despair sets in, the lover gives up hope and slips into depression.
Both are linked with the dopamine system in the brain.
And I suspect that both were deeply embedded in the hominin mind by the time Lucy was loving, perhaps even losing a beloved, long ago.
When lovers encounter barriers to their romantic feelings, their passion intensifies—what I call frustration-attraction.
Adversity heightens feelings of romantic love.
This phenomenon is rooted in the brain.
When a reward is delayed in coming, neurons of the brain’s dopamine system continue their activity—sustaining one’s feelings of intense romantic love.
Addiction has set in.
Even when romantic love isn’t harmful, it is associated with intense craving and anxiety.
Stress elevates this dopamine response.
When mammals first experience severe stress, among their bodily reactions is an increase in the activity of central dopamine and norepinephrine and a suppression of central serotonin, known as the stress response.
Rejected lovers can also suffer from frustration-aggression, what psychologists call abandonment rage.”
Even when a rejecting partner departs with compassion and graciously honors his or her responsibilities as a friend or co-parent, many abandoned people oscillate between heartbreak and fury—another response with neural correlates.
The primary rage system is closely connected to centers in the prefrontal cortex that anticipate rewards.
So as a person begins to realize that an expected reward is in jeopardy, even unattainable, these regions of the prefrontal cortex stimulate the amygdala and trigger rage, a trait that stresses the heart, raises blood pressure, and suppresses the immune system.
This rage response to unfulfilled expectations is well known in other mammals.
When a cat is petted, for example, it purrs.
When this pleasurable stimulation is withdrawn, it sometimes bites.
Indeed, romantic passion and abandonment rage have much in common.
Both are associated with bodily and mental arousal; both produce obsessive thinking, focused attention, motivation, and goal-directed behaviors; and both cause intense yearning—either for union with or retaliation against the rejecting lover.
Moreover, these feelings of romantic love and rage can act in tandem.
In a study of 124 dating couples, Bruce Ellis and Neil Malamuth reported that romantic love and anger/upset” react to different kinds of information.
The lover’s level of anger/upset oscillates in response to events that undermine the lover’s goals, such as a mate’s infidelity, lack of emotional commitment, or rejection.
The lover’s feelings of romantic love fluctuate in response to events that advance the lover’s goals, such as a partner’s visible social support during outings with relatives and friends, or a direct declaration of love and fidelity.
Thus, romantic love and anger/upset can operate concurrently, adding intensity to one’s rejection addiction.
We must have inherited this protest response, for it stems from a basic mammalian mechanism that gets triggered when any kind of social attachment is ruptured.
Take the puppy.
When it is removed from mother and put into the kitchen by itself, it immediately begins to pace, frantically leaping at the door, barking and whining in protest.
Isolated baby rats emit ceaseless ultrasonic cries; they hardly sleep because their brain arousal is so intense.
The purpose of this protest: to increase alertness and stimulate an abandoned creature to object, search, and call for help.
Protest, the stress response, frustration-attraction, abandonment rage, craving, withdrawal symptoms: All play a role in the worldwide incidence of crimes of passion.
Like all addictions, romantic love can lead to violence.
Eventually, however, the abandoned lover gives up.
He or she stops the pursuit of the beloved, ushering in the second general phase of romantic rejection, resignation/despair.
During this stage, the rejected one slips into feelings of lethargy, despondency, melancholy, and depression, known as the despair response.
In a study of 114 men and women who had been rejected by a partner within the past eight weeks, 40 percent experienced clinically measurable depression.
Some broken- hearted lovers even die from heart attacks or strokes caused by their depression.
Others commit suicide.
Surely most rejected lovers feel this sadness during the protest phase as well, but it’s likely to escalate as all hope vanishes.
This despair has been associated with several brain networks.
Yet, once again, dopamine circuits are most likely involved.
As the rejected partner comes to believe that the reward will never come, dopamine-producing cells in the reward system of the brain decrease their activity, producing lethargy, despondency, and depression.
Short-term stress escalates the production of dopamine and norepinephrine.
Long-term stress suppresses the activity of these neurochemicals, producing depression instead.
Many professionals define addiction as a pathological, problematic disorder.
And because romantic love is a positive experience under many circumstances, researchers remain largely unwilling to officially categorize romantic love as an addiction.
But love addiction is just as real as any other addiction, in terms of its behavior patterns and brain mechanisms.
Even when romantic love isn’t harmful, it is associated with intense craving and anxiety and can impel the lover to believe, say, and do dangerous and inappropriate things.
Moreover, all forms of substance abuse, including alcohol, opioids, cocaine, amphetamines, cannabis, and tobacco (as well as the non-substance addictions to food, gambling, and sex) activate several of the same reward pathways that are activated among men and women who are happily in love, as well as those rejected in love.
Unlike all other addictions, however, which afflict only a percentage of the population, some form of love addiction is likely to occur to almost every human being at some point during the life course.
Modern data suggest that romantic love should be treated as an addiction, regardless of its lack of official diagnostic classification as an addiction.
The human animal seems driven by a tide of feelings that ebb and flow to an internal beat, a rhythm that emerged when our ancestors first descended from the trees of Africa and developed a tempo to their relationships that was in synchrony with their natural breeding cycle—three to four years.
Perhaps the brain’s systems for dopamine, vasopressin, oxytocin, and other neurochemicals orchestrate this rhythm, escalating when you fall in love, changing as you begin to feel deep attachment and cosmic union, then eventually becoming desensitized or overloaded, leading to indifference or restlessness that slowly eats your love and leads to separation—a hardship that can trigger the mother of all addictions, addiction to a mate.
Dr. Helen Fisher is a biological anthropologist and senior research fellow at The Kinsey Institute.
She has written five internationally best-selling books on love and personality and is currently Chief Scientific Advisor to Match.com.
Excerpted from the book Anatomy of Love: A Natural History of Mating, Marriage, and Why We Stray © 2016 by Helen Fisher, published by W. W. Norton on Feb. 1, 2016.
Echo-planar MR imaging was performed in 52 subjects: consistent right- handers (RH), consistent left-handers (LH), and subjects who had been forced at an early age to switch their left-hand preferences toward the right side.
The scanning was performed during simple (flexion/extension of the index finger) and complex (successive finger-thumb opposition) tasks.
Subjects performed the tasks using both the preferred and non-preferred hand.
In righthanders, there was a general predominance of left-hemisphere activation relative to right hemisphere activation.
In lefthanders this pattern was reversed.
The switched subjects showed no such volumetric asymmetry.
Increasing levels of complexity of motor activity resulted in an increase in the volume of consistently activated areas and the involvement of the ipsilateral in addition to contralateral activations.
In both right- and left-handers, movements of the preferred hand activated mainly the contralateral hemisphere, whereas movements of the non-preferred hand resulted in a more balanced pattern of activation in the two hemispheres, indicating greater involvement of the ipsilateral activations.
Overall, this study shows that in both left- and right-handed subjects, the preferred hand is controlled mainly by the hemisphere contralateral to that hand, whereas the non-preferred hand is controlled by both hemispheres.
The switched individuals share features of both left-handers and right-handers regarding their motor control architectures.
Key words: left-handedness, motor control, fMRI, brain plasticity, hemispheric asymmetry
Hand preference is the most prominent behavioral expression of brain asymmetry in man.
The majority (approximately 90%) of the human population is righthanded.
Despite a long history of research on the neurobiological origin of handedness and common believe that it is strongly linked to the brain asymmetry (Grabowska et al. 1994), the neural correlates of hand preferences are still a matter of debate.
The advances in functional neuroimaging techniques have allowed the cortical representation of movements to be measured directly.
The neuroimaging studies that have focused on the brain correlates of hand preference have attributed this behavioral asymmetry to hemispheric lateralization of the cortical areas controlling motor function.
There is, however, a lack of consistency in these authors’ opinions as to the specific manifestation of handedness- related differences.
Such differences have been found either in the localization, the volumes or the number of activated areas in the two hemispheres or in the specific presence of ipsilateral activation in the motor control of the preferred vs. non-preferred hand.
Moreover, this ipsilateral activation pattern seems to be dependent on such features as movement complexity.
In their fMRI study Solodkin and coauthors (2001) found that, during the performance of a sequential finger movement task, left-handers tended to activate larger volumes in a greater number of association cortices and showed less lateralization than did righthanders.
A subsequent report by the same authors revealed that right-handers had greater activation in the left premotor area for either hand, indicating a general dominance of the left hemisphere in motor function, whereas the left-handed group showed a predominance of activation in the premotor cortex contralateral to the moving hand (either left or right), indicating no such asymmetry (Hlustik et al. 2002).
However, similar comparisons performed by Volkman and colleagues (1998) in a magnetoencephalographic study and by Dassonville and others (1997) in an fMRI study revealed that, in both right- and left-handers, the use of the preferred hand was associated with a greater volume of activation in the contralateral motor cortex.
Several papers have specifically focused on the ipsilateral activation issue based on the observation that in right-handers ipsilateral activation is characteristic of non-preferred (left) hand movements as opposed to preferred hand movement.
Singh and coauthors (1998) reported that right handers showed greater activation of the ipsilateral hemisphere in the sensorimotor region for non-preferred (left) hand movements compared to ipsilateral hemisphere activation for preferred (right) hand movements; whereas, in left- handers, such asymmetry was not present.
In line with those findings Gut and coworkers (2007) found in right-handed participants the advantage of ipsilateral activation during the left hand movements compared to the right hand movements.
Ipsilateral activation was also registered in lefthanded individuals by Kawashima and others (1997), but the effects were present in the premotor and not the motor cortex and in the right and not the left hemisphere.
Unfortunately, these data could not be contrasted with data from right-handers, as no appropriate control group was involved.
Two other studies pointed to similarities in the motor control of left- and right- handers: bothgroups had stronger ipsilateral activations in the motor cortex of the left hemisphere compared to the right hemisphere.
The only difference (revealed by Verstynenand coworkers in 2005) was that, in left-handers, the hemispheric asymmetries were less pronounced.
The divergence of the obtained results increases if one takes into account the type of motor tasks performed by the subjects in these studies.
Specifically, it is not clear whether differences between left- and right-handers apply to motor behavior in general or are predominantly linked to more complex motor tasks involving sequential component in the movements.

Using simple and complex movements, Solodkin and coauthors (2001) and Verstynen and colleagues (2005) found handedness-related differences only for complex tasks, however, differences have also been reported for relatively simple tasks (Volkman et al. 1998, Klöppel et al. 2007).
These findings points to the importance of controlling for task complexity in future studies.
Questions about the brain correlates of motor control in case of forced right-handedness are another interesting issue concerning the effect of hand-preference on the organization of motor function in the brain.
Many individuals, especially in older generation, report that they had experienced considerable pressure to switch their hand preference from left toright.
Switch attempts may proceed either nearly free of problems and lead to a change in the child’s hand preference for a wide range of everyday activities, including writing; or switch attempts may bring much difficulty and result in a switch of preferences for only few activities.
These specific activities are likely to include the specific targets of forced right-handednes such as writing, drawing or eating.
Taken these facts together, the question follows whether early changes of hand preference behaviors due to environmental pressure exerted upon originally left-handed individuals lead to changes in brain organization toward a more right-handed” brain, or do these people still preserve left handed” brain features.
The first possibility seems more plausible in light of many brain plasticity studies showing that the human brain is capable of substantial reorganization due to experience, and sensorimotor training.
However, the latter possibility cannot be excluded because the lateralization of brain function seems to be strongly genetically driven and, thus, heavily dependent on innate factors.
Whether the effectiveness of a hand-preference conversion process is somehow related to what happens in the brain is also extremely interesting.
It could be predicted that individuals who were more resistant to the alteration of hand preference were also more resistant to reorganization of their brains as compared with the individuals who switched more successfully.
In other words, the question is whether changes in the profile of behavioral preferences are reflected in the brain’s functional organization patterns.
Studying individuals who underwent attempts to switch toward right handedness and comparing them with consistent left- and right-handers presents an unusual opportunity to gain a better insight into the mechanisms that, on the one side, determine the lateralization of function and, on the other side, are involved in brain plasticity.
There are few functional or structural neuroimaging studies that investigated the neural correlates of switching handedness.
Siebner and coworkers (2002), performed fMRI study during writing with the dominant hand (i. e. the hand normally used for writing by the tested subjects).
The results showed the predominance of activation in left parietal and premotor regions in right-handers, and more bilateral activation with some activation foci in the right hemisphere (particularly in premotor, parietal and temporal areas) in switched left-handers.
Moreover, there was a relationship between the degree of left hand dominance and cerebral blood flow in these right hemisphere regions.
In the same research the brain activation pattern was also studied in consistent lefthanders; this pattern was characterized by a clear right hemisphere dominance (Siebner et al. 2002).
The authors concluded that the presence of right-hemisphere activation in converted left- handers is there flection of not complete left-to right shift in handedness and still present motor control exerted by the right hemisphere.
The disadvantages of this experimental design were that the authors were neither able to compare brain activity during dominant and nondominant hand movements (which, according to the previously mentioned papers, is critical for detecting hand preference-related differences), nor to make direct comparison between left- and right-hand writers as scanning in the two groups was performed for different hands.
In a more recent study Klöppel and colleagues (2007) studied the localization of movement related activity with fMRI while converted left-handers and age-matched groups of consistent left handers and righthanders pressed a button with their right, left or both hands depending on which of three symbolic visual cues was presented.
The authors have found two regions of increased activity in converted left-handers as compared to either consistent left-handers or righthanders: one in sensorimotor and premotor cortex in the left hemisphere and the other in inferior parietal cortex of the right hemisphere.
The increased activation in the left hemisphere was interpreted as a consequence of educationally induced high daily practice in right hand writing of that originally left- handed group.
The persisting activity in their right inferior parietal cortex was taken as en evidence that the involvement of higher order associative areas in the originally dominant hemisphere is invariant and cannot be switched to the opposite hemisphere due to educational training.
Importantly enough, this study did not consider the possible relationship between the ipsi- vs. contralateral activations and the handedness factor, neither it directly compared the activations in the two hemispheres elicited by either hand.
Moreover, due to simplicity of the movement (just pressing a button), the task focused more on taking a decision which hand should be used, than on movement execution control itself.
And this might require quite different neural circuits than finger tapping or writing used in previous studies.
This short review of the literature demonstrates that the existing data relating the functional brain architecture of motor function to handedness is highly inconsistent.
The failure to obtain consistent findings in these studies can be attributed to several factors, with the heterogeneity of the left-handed groups, the low numbers of participating individuals and the selection of divergent motor tasks being the most likely sources of confusion.
In the present study we used two different unpracticed motor tasks, one simple and one complex, that have been most commonly used in previous research on the brain’s representation of motor function and can be performed with either hand.
This enabled us: (1) to relate our data to the existing literature on motor control, (2) to provide data for both preferred and nonpreferred hand, and (3) to estimate the effect of task complexity on handedness-related differences in activation patterns.
The volumes of activation in ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres obtained in left-handers as well as converted left- handers were compared to those obtained in right-handers who were tested in our previous study (Gut et al. 2007) using the same procedure and scanner.
The present study addressed the following questions: (1) what are the differences in the organization of motor control in the brain between left-and righthanders, (2) does motor task complexity influence those differences, (3) do early switch of hand preference, due to social pressure, leads to long-lasting changes in brain organization, and (4) does the organization of motor function patterns in the brain reflect handedness preference and performance?
These issues are interesting not only from theoretical point of view, but they also have clinical value.
The knowledge on brain activation patterns in subgroups that differ in hand preference might help to make proper decisions as to which hand should be chosen forwriting in individual cases in which the preference is not obvious and in those who have used the non-preferred hand for a long time after injury of the originally preferred hand.
Fifty-two healthy subjects (24 males and 28 females) between 17 and 36 years of age (mean = 22.1 years; SD= 5. 3) participated in the study.
All participants were informed about the purpose of the study before giving their written consent.
None of the participants had any contraindications to MRI.
No participants reported neurological or psychiatric illnesses, learning disabilities, failures in elementary school or claustrophobia.
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Jagiellonian University.
Handedness assessment
To assess individual profiles of handedness we measured the direction and degree of hand preference in all subjects.
For this purpose subjects completed the 10-point Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield 1971).
For each subject, a Handedness Preference Index (HPI) ranging from +100 for extreme righthanders to −100 for extreme left-handers was calculated.
The participants were divided into four groups: consistent right-handers (RH, n=12), consistent left-handers (LH, n=17), switched successfully (SS, n=11) and switched unsuccessfully (SU, n=2).
The former two groups (LH and RH) consisted of subjects who reported consistent left- or right-hand preferences across their lives and no attempts at rightward shifts during childhood.
All individuals in the group of consistent left-handers used their left hand for writing and had a handedness preference index (HPI)<20. Individuals in the group of consistent right-handers used their right hand for writing and had a HPI>20.
The two latter groups (SS and SU) consisted of subjects who had been forced in childhood to switch their original lefthand preferences toward the right side resulting in the use of their right hands for writing.
In all cases interviews provided detailed information about the conversion process.
All unclear cases were excluded.
The selection of subjects for either the SS or the SU group was based on their hand preference profile.
Individuals showing the HPI>20 (as in the RH group) were selected for the SS group, whereas the individuals showing the HPI<20 (as in the LH group) were selected for the SU group.
Following other studies (Annett 2002), we used the HPI score of 20 as the demarcation line between left- and right-handedness because it is thought that the brain organization of individuals with slight preferences toward the right side resembles that typical for left- handers rather than for right-handers.
Thus, people with slight right preferences are, to some extent, considered to be left-handers who adapted their behavior to the demands of the right-shifted environment.
Brain imaging The experimental paradigm consisted of two experimental runs that each contained 10 alternating blocks of 3 conditions: (A) a simple movement task (flexion/extension of the index finger), (B) a complex movements task (sequential opposition of the thumb to tips of other fingers in the order: 5, 4, 3, 2, 5, 4 and so on), and (C) a rest period (during which the subjects were required to remain still).
Within each run, the blocks were repeated in the sequence CABCABCABC.
Each block lasted 15 s for a total 2 min 30 s per run.
Within each run the tasks were performed either with the right or the left hand.
The order of left and right hand runs was randomized across subjects.
Movements were self-paced at a rate of approximately 2 Hz, which was comfortable for subjects and easy to control.
All subjects practiced the two tasks prior to scanning to ensure similar task execution.
The onset of each of the different tasks was signaled by the presentation of one of three differently colored squares presented on a rear-projection screen visible to subjects through a system of mirrors mounted in the scanner.
A white square indicated the rest condition, a red square indicated the simple movement condition and a blue square indicated the complex movement condition.
The squares remained visible during each condition.
Before scanning the subjects were instructed how to react to each stimulus type that they would see on the screen.
Stimuli were back-projected from a multi-media projector on a screen located approximately 3 meters away from the magnet.
The study was performed using a 1.5 T Signa Horizon MR system.
The functional MRI images were acquired using an interleaved gradient-echo echoplanar (EPI) sequence sensitive to the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) contrast with the following parameters: 3 000/60 (repetition time ms/echo time ms), a 90º flip angle, a 18 × 13 cm field ofview (FOV), a 96 × 64 matrix, and the number of excitations equal to one.
In plane resolution was 1.41 × 1.41mm.
During each functional scanning session 50 sets of 10 contiguous, 7 to 10-mm-thick oblique sections were acquired, without any gap.
For each subject, all sections were set parallel to the axis connecting the anterior commissure and the caudal surface of the cerebellar tonsil and extended right up to the posterior midline boundary of the parietal lobe.
The selected slice-thickness was adjusted to each subject’s brain volume.
Coplanar, high-resolution structural MRI images were acquired for the same locations as the functional images using a SPoiled GRadient-echo (SPGR) sequence with the following parameters: 50/6 (repetition time ms/echo time ms), a 60º flip angle, a 18 × 13cm FOV, a 256 × 256 matrix, and the number of excitations equal to two.
In plane resolution was 0.86× 0.86 mm.
Depending on the subject, ten 7- to 10-mm-thick oblique sections were acquired, without any gap.
We made every effort to ensure subjects were as comfortable as possible to reduce head motion.
Subjects were asked to refrain from any movements, not to strain their muscles in any special way (except during the required motor tasks) and not to think about anything in particular while lying in the scanner.
A standard radio-frequency (RF) head coil with foam padding to restrict head motion was used.
The fMRI experiment was preceded by training ofthe subjects’ on the motor task.
Special attention was given to teaching the subjects to pace their movements at approximately twice a second without any preceding cues.
Thus, the task was highly automated before the start of the scanning procedure.
The images were first converted to the Analyze format with xmedcon.
The skull was then removed on the anatomical Analyze images with a probabilistic anisotropic diffusion and multi-scale watershed algorithm.
Statistical analyses were performed with FSL 3.
1 (FMRIB Software Library)(Smitch et al. 2004).
In the pre-processing step, the functional images were coregistered to the anatomical image.
To remove low frequency artifacts, a high-pass temporal filter was applied to the functional images by using a straight line fitting with a cutoff at 45 s.
Gaussian spatial smoothing with an FWHM kernel of 8 mm was carried out on the functional images to reduce noise.
In the statistical analysis, linear contrasts on between conditions at the subject level were calculated in native subject space as a pre-step to the higher-level analyses.
Higher level group analyses were performed by first registering the subject-level contrast images to a reference brain in Talairach standard space (Roland andZilles 1994); next FLAME (FMRIB’s Local Analysis of Mixed Effects) was used on the contrast images to estimate the inter-subject random-effects.
Each group’scross-subject variance was estimated separately.
The statistical Z-images from the group analysis were thresholded at z=3.3 to obtain clusters.
All clusters with a P≤0.05 were considered significant.
As a final step, the intersection volumes between significant clusters and cytoarchitectonically defined regions were calculated.
Previous reports suggest that the localization of particular brain areas associated with motor function may vary across subjects and that the particular regions need not to be the same size in the left and right hemispheres, especially when the sample varies in handedness profile.
Taking this variation into consideration, we decided rather to assess the general roles of left or right hemisphere in motor control by calculating the total volume of the activated areas in the left/right – contralateral/ipsilateral hemispheres.
Thus, our strategy was to quantify hemispheric asymmetries in the spatial extent of hand representation by computing the volume of all significantly activated voxels in either hemisphere.
These analyses were run in native subject space.
RESULTS
Behavioral data Mean
Handedness Preference Index (HPI) was calculated for each group of subjects and the mean index of handedness are presented in Table I. Noticeably, both the consistent right-handed (RH) and the successfully switched (SS) groups had clearly positive HPI values indicating right-hand preferences in a large range of activities.
Lower values of the index in the SS compared to the RH group indicate that the hand preference alteration was not complete, and some features of covert left- handedness persisted.
In both consistent left handed (LH) and unsuccessfully switched (SU) groups, the mean HPIs were negative, indicating the predominance of left-hand preferences for the majority of activities and thus an unsuccessful handedness switch in the SU group.
Imaging data
Localization of activation
The fMRI scans revealed a number of areas that were consistently activated during hand movements used in the study.
Figure 1 illustrates the localization of significant activations in the four groups of subjects for simple and complex movements performed with the right or left hand.
Significant group activations during simple movements were found in: precentral, postcentral, parietal superior, parietal inferior and supramarginal gyri, all exclusive to the hemisphere contralateral to the moving hand.
For complex movements, activation covered much broader areas including the cerebral cortex (precentral gyrus, postcentral gyrus, supplementary motor area, insula, cingulum, parietal lobuli, supramarginal, superior and medial temporal gyri), subcortical areas (putamen, pallidum, the thalamus) in both the contralateral and ipsilateral hemispheres for either hand.
In addition, cerebellar activations (mainly ipsilateral) were registered.
Volumes of hemispheric activation in relation to handedness and task complexity
Because the aim of the study was to determine whether the motor networks responsible for controlling left and right hand movements in the ipsilateraland contralateral hemispheres were asymmetrically activated and whether this effect depended on the hand preference and complexity of the task, the data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA) that used group (RH, LH, SU and SS), movement complexity (simple/complex), hemisphere (ipsilateral/contralateral) and hand (left/right) as the main factors and the volume of activation as the dependent variable.
This analysis revealed significant main effects of movement complexity (F1, 48=116.59; P<0.01)and hemisphere (F1, 48=101.54; P<0.01).
The result of t-tests indicated a larger volume of activation during complex than simple movement task (t51=11. 2; P<0.
01) and a larger volume of activation in the contralateral, compared to the ipsilateral hemisphere (t51=10. 08;P<0.
01).
Moreover, the analysis revealed three significant interactions: movement complexity × hemisphere (F1, 48=12.
42; P<0. 01), hand × hemisphere × group (F3, 48=4.
61; P<0.
01) and movement complexity × hemisphere × group × hand (F3, 48=5.
06; P<0.
01).
To investigate these interactions, two analyses of variance, separately for simple and complex tasks, using hemisphere (ipsilateral/contralateral), group (RH/LH/SS/US) and moving hand (left/right) as the main factors were conducted.
Analysis of the simple movement task data revealed a significant effect of hemisphere (F1, 48=86.23; P<0.
01), indicating larger activation in the contralateral, compared to the ipsilateral, hemisphere.
No other factors or interactions reached significance.
The same analysis performed for complex task showed a significant main effects of hemisphere (F1, 48 =74.94; P<0.01, with larger contralateral activations) and a significant interaction of group × hand × hemisphere(F3, 48 =6.
34; P<0.
01).
As illustratedin Figure 2, during the complex movement task in the RH group, larger contralateral activations were elicited by right (preferred) hand movements than left (non- preferred) hand movements (t11=2. 24; P<0. 05), whereas larger ipsilateral activations were elicited by left (non-preferred) hand movements than the right hand movements (t11=2. 87; P<0.
05), both leading to greater total activation in the left hemisphere.
The reverse pattern of activation emerged in the LH group: larger contralateral activations were elicited by the left (preferred) hand, and larger ipsilateral activations were elicited by the right (non- preferred) hand (both leading to larger total activation in the right hemisphere, however the differences between hands were not significant for contralateral or ipsilateral activation volumes).
In the two switched (SS and SU) groups the pattern of ipsilateral activations resembled those found in the RH and LH groups, respectively; whereas the contralateral activations for either hand did not differ from each other.
To analyze a possible relationship between brain activation patterns and behavioral lateralization patterns, total volumes of activation in each hemisphere were correlated with HPI index (assessed by the Oldfield Inventory).
Pearson correlation procedures for the entire sample of subjects (raw data from individual subjects from all four groups) revealed a significant positive correlation (r=0.31, P<0. 05) between the HPI and the total amount of activation in the left hemisphere.
No such relationship was found for the right hemisphere.
Higher HPIs (i. e. stronger right hand preference) were associated with larger volume of activation in the left hemisphere.
Separate analyses for the simple and complex movements revealed that this correlation was only significant for complex movements(r=0. 34, P<0. 05).
DISCUSSION
This study examined the volume of left and right hemisphere activations during hand movements in right-handers, left-handers and originally left-handed individuals who, during their childhood, received pressure to switch hand preference toward the right side.
Our goal was to clarify issues related to the brain mechanisms of hand preference and, specifically, to investigate the effect of switching hand preferences on the organization of motor control in the brain.
In contrast to previous studies, we controlled for the potential influences of several factors that are suspected to play a role in the brain activation pattern while subjects perform manual tasks: type of movement (simple vs. complex), hand performing the movement (preferred vs. non-preferred) and the activated hemisphere (ipsilateral vs. contralateral).
The most obvious finding of our study was that, for both hands and tasks, the contralateral activations were larger than the ipsilateral activations in all groups.
This concords with several previous studies and could be related to the fact that most ofthe motor fibers cross within the pyramidal tract.
Regarding the main question of the effect of hand preference on hemispheric asymmetry, our study revealed that both in left-handers and right-handers, movements of the preferred hand (right in RH and left in LH) produced larger contralateral activations than movements of the non-preferred hand.
In contrast to this, movement of the non-preferred hand, led to larger ipsilateral activations.
Consequently, in right-handers there was a general predominance of left-hemisphere activation, whereas in left-handers there was a predominance of right-hemisphere activation; although in the latter case, the asymmetry was smaller.
Notably, these effects were specific to complex rather than simple tasks (during simple tasks the activations elicited by either hand were similar).
This concords with the previous observations by Solodkin and coauthors (2001) and Verstynen and others (2005) who also found handedness-related differences onlyfor complex tasks.
Finding by Klöppel and colleagues (2007) that the cortical sensorimotor representation may depend on hand preference in simple bar pressing movements could be associated with the experimental procedure which differed considerably from that usedin other studies.
In this choice reaction time paradigm the subjects were expected to react with their left, right, or both hands depending on a presentation of one of three possible visual cues.
This task might present special difficulty for the left-handers due to their problems with discrimination between the left and right directions.
It seems plausible therefore, that the results obtained by Klöppel and coauthors (2007) are related to decisions regarding the hand choice rather than to monitoring the execution of an automatically performed bar pressing.
The finding that, in both the RH and LH groups, movements of the preferred hand lead to greater contralateral activation and movements of the non-preferred hand lead to greater ipsilateral activation implicates the existence of a common mechanism for motor control.
It may consist in exerting the motor control by the dominant hemisphere not only over the contralateral (preferred) hand but also over the ipsilateral (nonpreferred) hand.
In contrast, the non-dominant hemisphere is involved mainly in the motor control of the contralateral (non-preferred) hand.
In other words the preferred hand seems to be controlled mainly by the dominant hemisphere, while the non-preferred hand is controlled by both the dominant and non-dominant hemispheres as has already been suggested by Baraldi and others (1999).
The conclusion that in the right-handers the left hemisphere plays a dominant role in motor control is consistent with clinical evidence demonstrating that limb apraxia is more common after left hemisphere damage than after right hemisphere damage and disrupts motor skills even when the left, ipsilesional hand is used by the patients.
This conclusion also conforms the anatomical data showing structural asymmetries in the central sulcus (larger surfaces of dorsolateral motor cortex in the dominant hemisphere) in right-handers and left-handers.
Interestingly, recent clinical study on right-handed patients with unilateral paretic stroke (Rinehart et al. 2009) provided further observation, which perfectly matches our findings.
In this study the authors assessed the relative use of the right, left and both arms with wrist accelerometers.
The study demonstrated that the use of the ipsilateral but not contralateral limb after unilateral stroke was influenced by hand preference: the right hemisphere damaged patients used their ipsilateral, right (preferred) limb more than the left-hemisphere damaged patients used their ipsilateral, left(non-preferred) limb and more than healthy righthanders.
In other words the damage to the left hemisphere impaired the motor abilities of the left hand more than the damage to the right hemisphere impaired the motor abilities of the right hand.
This might suggest that in right-handers the involvement of the left (dominant) hemisphere in ipsilateral (left hand) motor control is greater than the involvement of the right hemisphere in the ipsilateral (right hand) motor control.
This nicely concords our findings which showed the involvement of the left hemisphere in both the contralateral and ipsilateral motor control in right-handers.
Those findings also agree to our conclusion that the right hemisphere in right-handers is mainly involved inthe contralateral (left hand) control and thus, damage to this hemisphere does not have so much negative impact on the use of the right hand as does the damage to the left hemisphere on the use of the left hand.
Those data also conform the general conclusion regarding the dominance of the left hemisphere in motor control in right-handers.
What could be the functional significance of relatively greater volume of activation in the hemisphere contralateral to the preferred hand?
It is reasonable to assume that an increase in the volume of neural tissue engaged in a motor behavior may support the correct execution of that behavior.
The expansion of hand motor cortex in the hemisphere contralateral to the dominant hand may thus provide the neural substrate for the more efficient execution of the complex motor activities performed by this hand.
The high proficiency in motor control of the hemisphere contralateral to the preferred hand may then be utilized during the execution of motor tasks not only by the preferred hand but also by the non-preferred one.
The finding of higher volumes of activation in the hemisphere contralateral to the preferred hand in both right- and left-handers agrees with a few other functional imaging studies of right- and left-handers.
In the present study we also investigated the brain organization patterns of subjects who were originally left-handed, but at the age of 7, were switched to righthandedness.
The results showed that switched participants shared features of both left-handers and righthanders.
Therefore, it could be speculated that the brains of the originally left-handed subjects underwent plastic changes that consisted in reorganization of their motor function toward the right-handed” brain.
This reorganization, however, was not complete and showed persisting features of the left-handed” brain.
Interestingly, there was a correspondence between the amount of supposed brain reorganization and the degree to which the individuals changed their hand preferences toward the right side.
Although the differences in brain activation in the two switched (SU and SS) groups were not statistically significant, it is worth noting that the activation patterns of their brains reflected the differences observed at the behavioral level: the SS group was more similar to the RH group, while the SU group resembled the LH group (at least when the pattern of ipsilateral activations was considered).
In both groups of converted left-handers, however, the brain organization was more symmetrical than in the two consistent handedness groups.
It is a matter of debate whether the hemispheric asymmetry in cortical organization of motor function is a consequence of, or a cause of hand preferences.
There are two contradictory explanations that should both be considered; different hand preferences may lead to differences in the amount of left and right hand training and, consequently, to differences in the cortical representation of each hand.
It could also be argued that it is the primary difference in brain organization that constitutes the causal factor driving human handedness.
The two groups of SU and SS subjects might have been different from an early age as to their hand preference profiles.
Their present brain organization patterns could, therefore, be a consequence of those early differences (Harris 1990).
Leaving the solution of this chicken and egg problem to future research, we want to note that neither of the two switched groups (even the SS group) was able to conform fully to environmental demands and completely change their hand preferences to full right- handedness.
Consequently, their HPIs were significantly lower than those of the group of consistent right-handers.
This difference may reflect the importance of inherited factors in shaping brain architecture, which can only undergo plastic changes to a limited extent.
Similar conclusion was drawn by the authors of two previous studies performed on converted left-handers, using functional MRI.
The advantage of our study consists in testing the effects of handedness on brain activation pattern using separate recordings for hand and hemisphere (ipsilateral or contralateral to the moving hand).
In theprevious fMRi studies the authors either used the paradigm which did not allow for making such comparison (Siebner et al. 2002) or simply disregarded those factors (Klöppel et al. 2007) focusing on identification of brain regions where converted left-handers showed a consistent difference in task related BOLD signal across all movement conditions and hands.
Such approach did not allow them to focus on the mechanisms which, as we have shown, may differ for ipsilateral vs contralateral activation patterns.
The observation that in the two switched (SS and SU) groups it was the patterns of ipsilateral and not contralateral activation which resembled that found in the RH and LH groups might suggest that the ipsilateral motor representation is more prone to undergo reorganization due to educational training than the contralateral one.
Testing this interesting possibility, however, requires more specific further investigation.
It is widely known that individual subjects, whether they are right- or left-handed, differ considerably as to their specific pattern of handedness.
In this study, we attempted to directly relate behavioral differences (individual profiles of hand preference) to individual patterns of activation in the two hemispheres.
In other words the question was whether individual patterns of organization of motor control in the brain constitute a continuum that corresponds directly with a continuum of individual patterns of hand preferences.
Our data revealed a significant correlation between total activation in the left hemisphere and the handedness preference index (HPI) that indicates that the stronger the right hand preference, the larger the total volume of activation in the left hemisphere.
A similar relationship between hand preference index and the anatomical parameters has been demonstrated by Amunts and coauthors (1996, 2000) in the primary sensorimotor and by Klöppel and others (2010) in the left middle putamen.
CONCLUSIONS
To sum up, in both left- and right-handed subjects, the preferred hand is controlled mainly by the hemisphere contralateral to that hand, whereas the nonpreferred hand is controlled by both hemispheres.
The switched individuals share features of both left- handersand right-handers regarding their motor control architecture and hand preference profiles.
Increasing levels of complexity of motor activity results in an increase in the volume of consistently activated areas and the involvement of the ipsilateral in addition to contralateral activations, especially in the dominant hemisphere.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank prof. Terrence Hines for his valuable comments on the first draft of this paper and Barbara Sobiecka and Justyna Kozub for technical assistance.
This study was supported by a grant no. 1 H01F056 27 from the Polish State Committee for Scientific Research and grant no. 2011/03/B/HS6/05161 from the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education.
Who was Julian of Norwich?
In order to understand the figure and the message of this extraordinary English medieval mystic of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth century we have to glimpse briefly the historical background in which she lived.
The fourteenth century was a period of many great mystics and saints, like Angela of Foligno, Gertrude the Great, Christina of Stommeln, Raymond Lull, Margaret Ebner, Henry Suso, Lidwina of Schiedam, also Catherine of Sienna and Bridget of Sweden who struggled for the Reform of the Church and the Papacy.
At the same time it was an unusually tumultuous age.
The plague of the Black Death, the Great Schism and the Hundred Years’ War between the kings of France and England made of this period one of the darkest moments of the world and Church history.
This general situation of suffering and confusion was present not only on the continent, but was deeply felt in England as well.
The first wave of the Black Death came to Britain from the continent in 1348 when Julian was about six years old.
Two further onslaughts followed in 1361 and 1369 when she was nineteen and twenty-six years old.
The disease was so violent and contagious that nearly anyone who touched the sick became infected and died.
A chronicler of that period reports that the priests who ministered to the dying, were put into the same grave with their penitents.
It is estimated that more than a third of the population perished.
There were many who considered the plague an eschatological sign of divine retribution.
The impression that apocalyptic times were at the doors was strengthened by the longest conflict in the history of warfare, lasting from 1337 to 1453.
It was a conflict for the French throne between the royal house of Valois who claimed the title of King of France, and the house of Anjou from England, who claimed to be both Kings of England and of France, since they had their roots in the French regions of Anjou and Normandy.
The English invasion was initially very successful in gaining new territories and much plunder, but after the involvement of St. Joan of Orleans in the battle and the solemn crowning of Charles VII as king of France at Reims, they lost eventually much of what had been gained.
And though the war was fought mostly on the continent, the continuous suffering and the casualties flung both countries into deeper depression and privation.
1 Cf. C. Creighton, A History of Epidemics in Britain, vol. 1, New York 1965 2 , 121.
The situation in England was further aggravated by the peasants’ rebellion against the lords, secular and ecclesiastical.
The peasants rampaged across the country pillaging castles, churches and monasteries.
When the revolt and plundering were finally stopped, it ended in cruel reprisals.
One of its leaders, Geoffrey Litster was sentenced to death by the bishop of Norwich, Henry Despenser, at the gallows not far from Julian’s cell.
Finally, the Great Schism of 1378-1415 brought one of the greatest spiritual crisis for the Church and medieval society.
The quarrel for the true pope between the claimants of Rome and Avignon shook the Church in its very foundations.
Urban VI, the roman claimant to the papacy, went so far in his opposition to his rival, Clement, as to organize a crusade against him.
He entrusted the leadership and responsibility to bishop Despenser who promised indulgences to those who would support the cause in a military or financial way.
Naturally, it ended in disaster.
Some of the crusaders were killed, some were captured, and the rest, including the bishop, returned home in disgrace.
The failure of the papacy, the corruption of the ecclesial hierarchy, the abuse of indulgences and the crusade itself provoked general distrust in the visible institution of the Church among the faithful on the continent as well as in England, and prepared the ground for the precursors of the Reformation.
The XIV century England saw John Wyclif preaching a reform of the Church.
He attacked the misuse of indulgences, criticized the ecclesiastical hierarchy for seeking power and wealth, and desired that the Church return to the primitive simplicity of the Gospel.
Besides, he supported the translations of the Bible into the English vernacular so that common people could understand it.
Scarcely a decade after Wyclif’s death a bull was issued by Boniface IX, 1396, against Wyclif’s followers, called the Lollards.
In England they started to be fiercely persecuted and this culminated in the Constitutions (1407-1408) of the Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England, Thomas Arundel, who labelled them as traitors and heretics.
Unfortunately, this Constitution prohibited also the use of the Bible and theological writings in English by lay people, seeing in it an association with the heresy of Wyclif.
The anti-Wycliffite persecutions took place also in Norwich, supported by the warlike bishop Despenser who swore to put to death by flame or by decapitation any of the dissenters who might presume to preach in his diocese.
Julian might have been a silent witness of their execution at a place known as the Lollard Pit.
The city of Norwich, built around the River Wensum and located in the county of Norfolk near the coast of East Anglia, was an important port and England’s second largest city boasting 10, 000-12, 000 inhabitants in Julian’s time.
It was a flourishing centre of trade and religious life, attracting a number of religious orders and movements, including Lollards, who set up their houses there.
This Rome of England, as Norwich used to be called in the medieval times, had 57 churches inside the city wall, of which 31 still exist today.
It confirms a popular saying that the city had: A church for every week and a pub for every day.
It is in this historical context that Julian of Norwich receives extraordinary visions on God’s love towards all people.
Amidst all the calamities raging around, her book of revelations, or Showings, as she herself often calls them, must have had a counter-cultural and revolutionary impact.
With childlike simplicity and unwavering hope she comes to tell us that despite all evils God loves us and will make all things well again.
In this way she succeeds in undermining the wide-spread belief of the time, namely, that disasters and wars come from God who, enraged by our sins, sends chastisements upon the world.
Julian’s visions stand in complete opposition to this theology of God’s anger, reminding us of the basic truth of the biblical Revelation: God is love (1 Jn 4, 16).
There is no doubt that Julian can be inserted into the long tradition of mystical theology that goes from St. Dionysius the Areopagite up to the unknown author of The Cloud of Unknowing.
She is often compared to great medieval mystics, and in particular to St. Bridget of Sweden, the author of her own Revelations.
There are also striking similarities between Julian’s Showings and the Interior Castle of St. Theresa of Avila: both of them speak of the human soul as a citadel or a castle in the centre of which God himself dwells.
That is the reason why Julian can be regarded as one of the great pillars of western mysticism.
Thomas Merton considers Julian and John Henry Newman, beatified by Benedict XVI on 19 September 2010, the greatest English theologians.
Though Julian considers herself unlearned, Merton sees in her a true theologian, since she does not simply transmit what she experienced, but elaborates theologically the content of her visions.
Finally, with her Showings of Love, as far as it unveils God’s motherly operation of mercy and compassion for the world, Julian can be seen as a fourteenth century precursor of St. Faustina Kowalska, the great harbinger of the Divine Mercy in the XX century.
Though Julian lived the hidden life of a recluse, her cell in Norwich has become a source of spiritual enlightenment and comfort for our tormented times as well as for hers.
Today she is considered one of the giants of western spirituality whose writings possess universal and permanent value.
She is truly the spiritual Mother of England, as the first editor of her Showings, the Benedictine Father Serenus Cressy, called her.
Despite the fact that Julian has not been officially canonised by the Catholic Church – the Anglican Church venerates her as blessed on May 8 –, the new Catechism of the Catholic Church explicitly acknowledges her holiness as it presents her, along with St. Catherine of Siena and St. Thomas More, as those saints who witness to the truth that God works with those who love him and turns everything to their good (Rm 8, 28) and quotes the following passage from her Showings: And in this way I was taught by the grace of God that I ought to keep myself steadfastly in the faith and that I should stand firm and believe firmly that every kind of thing will be well… You will see yourself that every kind of thing will be well (LT 233).
The greatest acknowledgment, though, on the part of the Catholic Church was granted to Mother Julian by the present Holy Father, Benedict XVI.
Continuing with his series on great women of the Church, the Pontiff gave a catechesis on the figure of this English mystic in his Wednesday audience on December 1, 2010, held in the Paul VI Hall.
He pointed out, above all, her vocation as a spiritual mother to the many people who sought her counsel, and the immeasurable optimism that irradiates from her message on the tender and motherly love of God.
St. Julian made an account of her Revelations in two writings, known as the Short Text and the Long Text.
Henceforth, the Long Text will be referred to throughout the book as LT, and the Short Text as ST.
Throughout the text the quotations will be taken from the modern version of Julian’s Revelations, based on the critical text, by E. Colledge – J. Walsh, Julian of Norwich.
There are some bequests in wills that were probably made to her to support her living as an anchoress at St. Julian’s Church in Norwich.
In one of these, dated March 1393, it is said that the rector of St. Michael’s Church at Coslany in Norwich, Roger Reed, left two shillings to Julian anakorite.
In the will of 1415 it is said that John Plumpton, a citizen of Norwich, left forty pence to the ankress in ecclesia santi Juliani de Conesford in Norwice and twelve pence each to her serving maid and to her former maid Alice.
A year later, in 1416, the Countess of Suffolk, Isabel Ufford, left a bequest of twenty shillings to Julian.
Finally, the last bequest was made in 1429 and confirmed in 1432 by Robert Baxter, a citizen and merchant of Norwich, who left three shillings and four pence to the anchorite at St. Julian’s church in Conisford 5 .
The evidence of these wills clearly demonstrates that Julian must have been a highly esteemed personality in her town.
Francis Blomfield, the Norfolk antiquarian, leaves us a report that in the 18th century Julian’s anchorhold did not exist anymore, but was razed to the ground during the dissolution of monasteries.
Besides, in his History of Norwich, he gives us some precious information about the anchoress herself: In the east part of this Church-yard stood an Anchorage, in which an Ankress or Recluse dwelt ’til the Dissolution, when the house was demolished, tho’ the Foundations may still be seen.
In 1393, Lady Julian the Ankress here, was a strict Recluse, and had 2 servants to attend her in her old age, A o 1443.
This woman in those Days was esteemed one of the Greatest Holynesse.
The date of 1443, furnished by Blomfield, seems surprising.
It would imply that Julian who was born in 1342 lived for more than a hundred years.
Julian scholars usually discard this information as not very trustworthy, and explain that he confused our Julian with another recluse that lived here after Julian had died and who took the same name after the patron saint of the Church, St. Julian.
Yet, Blomfield’s information is not thoroughly impossible.
First of all, we do not have any solid contrary proofs against Julian’s old age and, secondly, Blomfield’s text does not exhibit any confusion of Julian, who was considered a person of great holiness, with another recluse who may have followed her way of life.
There is another important witness to Julian’s historicity, given by her contemporary, Margery Kempe of King’s Lynn.
She was also a mystic, but of a totally different cast of mind.
Unlike Julian, who wanted to remain hidden and forgotten, Margery was a self- centred woman, always ready to extol her own personality, and too much preoccupied with extraordinary manifestations of the mystical life.
She tells us in her autobiography that she sought Julian out for advice in her cell, in about 1412 or 1413, since she was enjoying the fame of a well-known expert in spiritual guidance and discernment.
Margery makes no mention of Julian’s book of Showings, yet the conversation that she recorded in her book reflects strikingly Julian’s theology of love.
A Texas taxidermy shop displays a fresh giraffe trophy.
Cardboard strips and pins hold the skin in place while it dries on a giraffe-shaped styrofoam form.
Giraffe numbers have dropped by 40 percent in 30 years, to about 110, 000 in the wild.
Of all the large African mammals that wildlife veterinarian Pete Morkel has had to capture over his career—lions, forest elephants, white rhinos—giraffes are the most stressful.
With other animals, you’re trying to give just enough anesthetic to immobilize them, but with a giraffe, we use a total overdose to chemically knock them off their feet, the sun-leathered 59-year-old tells me as I stalk him stalking a two- year-old female giraffe somewhere in the Nigerien bush, about 60 miles east of Niamey, Niger’s capital.
He is wearing a camo hat and a pair of torn, purple- checkered boxers that he’s been wearing as shorts for the past several days.
Morkel has loaded his dart gun with a dose of etorphine, an opioid about 6, 000 times more powerful than morphine.
Once it penetrates the giraffe’s skin, he and his team will have just minutes to chase down the animal, tackle her, and inject her neck with an antidote to keep her from dying.
If she can be successfully captured and survive a 500-mile translocation across Niger, she’ll become one of eight founding Adams and Eves of a new population of one of the world’s rarest wild mammals.
An orphaned giraffe nuzzles a caregiver at Sarara Camp in northern Kenya.
Samburu cattle herders found the abandoned calf and alerted Sarara—known for raising orphaned stmammals and returning them to their habitat.
The young giraffe now lives with a wild herd.
The giraffes we have chased for a week are the descendants of some 50 animals that made their way to the West African country of Niger in the late 1980s, when drought and war pushed them from their habitat in neighboring Mali.
They walked south-southeast across the Sahel, along the Niger River, and skirted Niamey before settling in the Koure region, on a dry and dusty plateau.
A Fulani herder named Amadou Hama, 76, recalled what it was like decades ago when he first encountered one of these giraffes one evening while tending his cattle.
We thought it was the devil, because of that neck and those horns.
People had told me about dangerous animals like lions, but nobody had ever told me about the giraffe.
These newly arrived giants were the last survivors of a once vast population of white giraffes whose range at the turn of the last century spanned all of West Africa, from the coast of Senegal to Nigeria.
Framed against the Nairobi skyline, giraffes roam Nairobi National Park, four miles from the center of Kenya’s sprawling capital.
More than 100 mammal species live in the 45-square-mile park, but Nairobi’s expansion threatens this habitat.
In 2016 a team of scientists came to an epiphany (if still contentious) about giraffes.
Until then, the conventional view held that all giraffes belonged to a single species, Giraffa camelopardalis.
But genetic analysis now suggests that giraffes are in fact four distinct species, actually more different from each other than the brown bear is from the polar bear.
And those four species can be further classified into five subspecies, including the rare West African Giraffa camelopardalis peralta, the pale, spotted refugees now found only in the Koure region of Niger.
Based on this new taxonomy, all but two subspecies would be considered vulnerable, endangered, or critically endangered, and across Africa, populations have declined by almost 40 percent over the past three decades, leaving an estimated 110, 000 giraffes in the world.
Julian Fennessy, co-director of the Giraffe Conservation Foundation (GCF), calls this the silent extinction, because unlike the attention lavished on the disappearance of elephants and great apes, most people assume that giraffes are doing just fine in the wild, perhaps because of their abundance in zoos and as stuffed animals.
GIRAFFES IN DANGER
Some 110, 000 giraffes roam throughout Africa, down from a million in the 1700s.
Scientists had long believed that all giraffes belonged to a single species, but new DNA research has identified four distinct species.
Top threats to giraffes include habitat fragmentation, deforestation, war, and poaching.
The Kordofan and Nubian, subspecies of northern giraffes, are most threatened, living mainly in war-torn countries.
Northern giraffes lack spots on the lower legs.
Reticulated giraffes get their name from their clearly defined patches.
There is some evidence that their numbers— although low—are stabilizing in Kenya.
Of the four main species, Masai giraffes have the darkest complexion.
Thirty years ago this species was the most populous, but it’s since been reduced by half.
The southern giraffe is at the least risk.